Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/ 





MEDITATIONS FOR RETREATS. 



TAKEN FROM THE WRITINGS OF 

ST. FRANCIS DE SALES. 

ARRANGED BY 

ST. JANE FRANCES FREMIOT DE CHANTAL. 



FROM THE FRENCH 
BT A VISITANDINE OF BALTIMORE



NEW YORK, CINCINNATI, CHICAGO: 
BENZIGER BROTHERS, 

Printers to the Holy Apostolic See, 
1900. 



Nihil Obstat.

REMY LAFORT, 

Censor Librorum. 

Imprimatur : 

+ MICHAEL AUGUSTINE, 

Archbishop of New York. 

NEW YORK, January 16, 1900. 

Copyright, 1900, by BENZINGER BROTHERS. 



Mother de Chantal to the Sisters of the  
Visitation. 

My very dear Sisters: 

We gladly send you this manuscript, as 
it is taken from the works of our blessed 
Father, and especially from several mem- 
oirs written by his dear and holy hand. 
These are his thoughts and words; you will 
readily recognize in them his spirit We 
have endeavored to abridge and arrange 
them into Meditations that may serve for 
the retreats made before the renovation of 
our vows, because many of our Sisters, the 
Superioresses, have long urged us to do so. 
I think that, after the first and second parts 
of Philothea, you will find nothing more 
solid or practical. If you read and reflect 
upon them attentively, they will enlighten 



your understanding and inflame your 
hearts. The Meditations on Silence, on 
Modesty, and on several other religious vir- 
tues are wanting, because these subjects 
were not treated in the brief memoirs of 
our blessed Father. You will find them in 
the exercises of Reverend Father Dom 
Sens, which our blessed Father held in 
great esteem, or elsewhere. Believe me, 
my very dear Sisters, I most cheerfully 
communicate to you all that we possess 
of the writings of our holy Founder, being 
anxious beyond expression that we may live 
upon his sweet and holy doctrine. May 
God grant us the grace to accomplish this! 
Supplicate His goodness in behalf of 

Your unworthy Sister and servant in Our 
Lord, 

Sister JANE FRANCES FREMIOT. 
God be praised! Amen. 



Preface.

IT is a custom observed from time imme- 
morial among the children of God, who 
knows the frailty and weakness of their 
nature, to renew their good purposes and 
holy resolutions. The Israelites, the chosen 
people of God, did so at every new moon, 
when the trumpet was sounded, and a 
solemn festival held, in order to elevate 
the mind to eternal things. Holy Church, 
from time to time, presents grand feasts 
and solemnities to her children, that they 
may renew their desire and resolution of 
doing better. The ancient Religious chose 
for this end the day of their profession and 



entrance into religion. But as the Daugh- 
ters of the Visitation should not be attached 
even to special anniversaries, they have 
most appropriately selected the festival of 
the Presentation to make the renewal of 
their vows with Mary, who offered herself 
to God on this day. In this action we verify 
the words of the Prophet David that many 
virgins would be brought to God after the 
example of the most blessed Virgin, to be 
offered to the divine majesty. To do this 
with more humility, it is very proper that 
we prepare for it by a retreat of several 
days, in which to renew our vows, refresh 
our soul, and strengthen our resolutions. 
As a skilful player on the lute is accus- 
tomed from time to time to tighten or relax 
its strings in order to tune them to a certain 
pitch and render them harmonious, so 
every year, in our retreats, we should test 
the affections of our soul as to whether they 



are in accord to intone the canticle of the 
glory of God and of our own perfection. 
For this end we make our annual confes- 
sion, by which we recognize all discordant 
chords, all immortified affections, all resolu- 
tions not faithfully practised; and having 
thus tightened the pegs of our spiritual 
lute, we begin again to sing the canticle of 
divine love, which consists in strict observ- 
ance. In imitation of our glorious Mis- 
tress and under her protection, we offer our- 
selves on the altar of divine Goodness, to 
be wholly consumed in the fire of His 
burning love. 

To these animating words of our blessed 
Founder we have thought it advisable to 
join an admonition of a worthy servant of 
God who, speaking of the profit we should 
draw from solitude, says: "Great talkers 
ordinarily leave their retreat lovers of 
silence and retirement; the slothful and lax 



become fervent, diligent, and prompt to 
their duty; they who thought only of their 
own ease are henceforth enemies of corrupt 
nature and friends of mortification, without 
which the spiritual life cannot exist. If 
you have made a good retreat, you should 
have learned therein to converse meritori- 
ously with God in reverence, humility, 
union, love, and continual recollection of 
His divine presence; to converse advan- 
tageously with yourself in purity of heart, 
in solitude, in peace, and in sincere love of 
your spiritual welfare and hatred of self; 
to converse well with the Sisters in charity, 
mutual support, and edification; and, when 
requisite, to treat with strangers in mod- 
esty and devotion, showing them that you 
live but for God; in short, to converse well 
with your guardian angel and the saints, 
by often visiting and remembering them. 



May God bestow upon you this grace! 
Amen. 

First Convent of the Visitation of Holy Mary, 
ANNECY, August 15, 1637, commenced under 
the auspices of the glorious Mother of God. 

God be praised! 




Contents 




Mother de Chantal to the Sisters of the Visitation. 3 

Preface. 5 

I. Meditation on the Creation. 15 

II. Meditation on the End for which we 
were Created. 19 

III. Meditation on the Benefits of God. 23 

IV. Meditation on Sin. 28 

V. Meditation on Death. 33 

VI. Meditation on Judgment. 38 

VII. Meditation on Hell. 44 

VIII. Meditation on Heaven. 49 

IX. Meditation on Religious Poverty. 54 

X. Meditation on Obedience. 59 

XI. Meditation on Chastity. 64 

XII. Meditation to Assist us to Know our 
Misery and Weakness. 68 

XIII. Meditation on the Submission that Our 
Saviour practised in His Divine In- 
fancy. 72 



XIV. Meditation on the Incomparable Grace 
that we possess in being Daughters 
of Holy Church. 77 

XV. Meditation on the Particular Benefit 
of the Religious Vocation. 82 

XVI. Meditation on the Obligation imposed 
by the Religious Life of strictly imi- 
tating Our Saviour. 87 

XVII. Meditation on the Principal Lessons 
that Our Saviour teaches the Relig- 
ious Soul. 92 

XVIII. Meditation on the Means by which the 
Religious Soul ravishes the Heart of 
her Beloved. 97 

XIX. Meditation on the Love of our Neighbor. 102 

XX. Meditation on the Garden of Olives. 107
 
XXI. Meditation on the Love of Our Saviour 
in the Midst of His Labors. 112 

XXII. Meditation on Our Saviour on the 
Cross. 116 

XXIII. Meditation on the First five Words that 
Our Saviour spoke on the Cross 121 

XXIV. Meditation on the Blessed Virgin stand- 
ing at the Foot of the Cross. 126 

XXV. Meditation on the Death of Our Sav- 
iour on the Cross. 131 



XXVI. Meditation on the Joy and Happiness 
that the Devout Soul experiences in 
the Cross. 136 

XXVII. Meditation on the Resurrection of Our 
Lord. 141 

XXVIII. Meditation on the Ascension of Our 
Lord. 146 

XXIX. Meditation on the Descent of the Holy 
Ghost. 151 

XXX Meditation on the Presence of God. 156 

XXXI. Meditation on the Providence of God. 160 

XXXII. Meditation on the Will of God. 165 

XXXIII. Meditation on Detachment and on the 
Conclusion of the Retreat. 170 

Letter of Mother de Chantal on Retreats. 174 

Examen for Annual Confessions. 179 



Meditations for Retreats. 



FIRST MEDITATION. 

THE CREATION. 

I. Point. 

WHENCE have we come? The country 
we have left is nothingness. Where were 
you, my dear soul, so many years ago? You 
were nothing. O nothing, without subsist- 
ence or being! O nothing, you are my coun- 
try, in which I long remained unknown, 
vile, and eternally abject. "I have said," 
exclaims Job to corruption, "you are my 
father;" but I have said to nothingness, you 
are my country. I have been drawn from 
your dark abyss and from your loathsome 
cavern. 



II. Point. 

Who has drawn us from nothingness? 
Who has given us being? Who is Our 
Father? As trees in winter hide away their 
flowers and fruits until they shoot forth and 
are seen in the proper season, so God willed 
from all eternity to create you, O my soul! 
He kept you enclosed in His mind, as it 
were, in order to produce you when the 
time should arrive. Ah! are you not happy 
to be the child of so good a Father? 

III. Point. 

When I was nothing, and engulfed in 
nothingness, the will of God decreed to be- 
stow upon me a being at a certain time and 
in a certain place, as has been done. Our 
nature, the old Adam, with its evil inclina- 
tions, proceeds from nothingness and al- 
ways tends to its origin, that is, to nothing-



ness and sin. From God proceeds our new 
Adam, our spiritual inclinations, which 
tend at all times to their origin, that is, to 
good, to virtue, and to the enjoyment of 
God. 

Affections. 

Of myself, then, what am I, if not a 
true nothing, a child of nothingness? 
Wretched and miserable, what have I to 
glory in? Why should I consider myself 
of any consequence? 0 nothing! I shall 
always remember you, and never exalt my- 
self. I shall endeavor to humble my soul, 
by keeping before its eyes its obscure and 
wretched origin. Alas! it has nothing in 
which to glory, yet it would make a display 
of itself. 

O God! what do I not owe to Thy will 
which, for so many ages, thought of me in 
the bosom of Thy providence? O holy 



will! I belong to thee. Make of me, in 
me, and by me all that may be pleasing to 
thee, for I am thy work. What an outrage 
to be rebellious to the will that has pro- 
duced me and that alone preserves me! 

Ah, the human heart! Although sur- 
rounded by the vile things of nature, yet 
at the first glance that it casts upon God, 
its natural inclination causes it to recognize 
its centre. Come, then, my poor heart, rise 
like a spark from the ashes of your lowli- 
ness, and render the love and obedience 
due to your Creator. 



SECOND MEDITATION. 

THE END FOR WHICH WE WERE CREATED. 

I. Point 

REFLECT that God has made us to His 
image and likeness, in order that we may 
love Him. It is so true that our heart is 
created to love its God that, as soon as it 
dwells attentively on the divinity, it ex- 
periences a certain sweet emotion which 
testifies that God is the God of our heart. 

II. Point. 

Reflect that, if God had not created man, 
He would, indeed, have been sovereignly 
good, but He would not have been actually 
merciful, in so far as mercy is exercised 
only toward the miserable. O sweet con- 
solation ! The sun was created to enlighten 



Digitized by 



20 END OF OUR CREATION. 

me, the fire to warm me, and so on with 
other creatures; but you, 0 my soul, poor 
and wretched, you were created that you 
might become the object of the divine 
mercy. 

III. Point 

Reflect, moreover, that you were created 
to aspire continually to God. Eivers flow 
unceasingly and, as the Wise Man says, 
return to the place whence they came. 
" O God," exclaims St. Augustine, " Thou 
hast made my heart for Thyself, and it 
will never find rest but in Thee; yes, Lord, 
for Thou art the God of my heart, my 
portion and my inheritance." 

Affections. 

Eeturn thanks, O my soul, to this divine 
Master and Author of nature, who daily 
bestows upon you all the assistance neces- 



Digitized by 



END OF OUR CREATION. 21 



sary to attain the end for which He created 
you, which is to love Him. Ah! I was 
not made for this world. There is a sov- 
ereign Artisan who made me for Himself; 
therefore, I should aspire after and return 
to Him in order to unite myself to His 
goodness to which I belong. 

0 sweet and desirable meeting of the 
wealth of my God and of my poverty ! Ah! 
how happy I am to be placed in the world 
for an end so excellent as to proclaim the 
excess of sovereign goodness! 

O all you who are upon the earth, you 
are pilgrims, created to exclaim with St. 
Augustine: " 0 to desire, 0 to love, 0 to 
approach, O to attain to God ! " Come, let 
us go to our lasting city, to the place of our 
repose. Our hearts should be like the chil- 
dren of Jonadab, who dared not build 
houses on this earth. O religious soul! 
prepare yourself well, for the earth upon 



Digitized by 



22 END OF OUR CREATION. 

which you tread is holy, and the place to 
which you journey is sanctified. 



Digitized by 



THE BENEFITS OF GOD. 23 



THIRD MEDITATION. 

THE BENEFITS OF GOD. 

I. Point 

Reflect that God created us to be, as it 
were, the perfection and epitome of the 
universe. He made our soul a treasury of 
His riches, which caused Daniel to exclaim: 
" The most high God hath wrought signs 
and wonders toward me." 

II. Point 

Reflect that God has been so liberal 
toward you, that He has made the whole 
world for you. Behold, O my soul, the 
heavens, the earth, and all created things ! 
All things were made for you, some for 
your use, others for your comfort and pleas- 
ure. But how should all be used ? As Our 



Digitized by 



24 THE BENEFITS OF GOD. 



Lord and the saints used them, that 
is > moderately, holily, and devoutly. How 
have I made use of them ? Extravagantly 
and in a worldly manner. I have referred 
them all to myself, I have considered only 
the pleasure they brought me, like a bad 
agent to whom much has been confided, but 
who has misused everything. 

III. Point. 

Behold, O my soul, the multitude of the 
benefits which God has imparted to you! 
Tou were cared for at your birth, you were 
baptized, brought up in the Church, with- 
drawn from the profane crowd, instructed 
in spiritual things, favored with a thou- 
sand lights, urged to a thousand good reso- 
lutions. "What thanks should you not re- 
turn for all this ! But oh, how unfaithful 
have you been in this respect ! Alas ! like 
a prodigal child, you have abused the bless- 



Digitized by 



THE BENEFITS OF GOD. 25 



ings and kindness of your Father. Have 
recourse at all times to Him, for He is 
goodness itself, and He will receive you. 

Affections. 

0 Lord, how liberally Thou hast en- 
riched this beautiful soul of mine with mar- 
vellous gifts! Ah! what happiness it i3 
to have faith in Our Saviour, to hope in 
Him, to love Him with the desire of yield- 
ing implicit obedience to His divine com- 
mands ! O sovereign Donor, to crown Thy 
benefits, grant my soul yet more, namely, 
that it may never abuse Thy divine gifts. 
Strengthen my faith, confirm my hope, in- 
crease my good desires, inflame my affec- 
tions, that I may become worthy of the su- 
pereminent grace of receiving Thy most 
holy body. 

Ah ! how can I be ungrateful to so be- 



Digitized by 



26 THE BENEFITS OF GOD. 



nign and liberal a Saviour, since I know 
that He has created for me not only all 
that I behold, all that I taste, and all that 
I feel, but that His liberality exceeds even 
this ! Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, 
the great blessings He has in reserve for 
me, if I prove a loyal servant. O my King, 
at every moment I experience the effects 
of Thy liberality, yet seldom do I say to 
Thee in return, " I thank Thee." As there 
is not a moment in which I do not enjoy 
Thy benefits, so not one should go by with- 
out my returning heartfelt thanks. 0 my 
soul, how shall we do this, except by using 
the world well and religiously as if we were 
using it not, so that our whole life may be- 
come an act of thanksgiving. To this end 
we must attach ourselves to the Giver and 
not to His gifts. 

Ah, my Benefactor! if David exclaimed, 
" What shall I render to the Lord for all 



Digitized by 



THE BENEFITS OF GOD. 27 



the things that He hath rendered tome?" 
should not the Christian, should not the re- 
ligious soul^be in still greater perplexity 
to find a worthy return for Thy favors ? 0 
God of all goodness, if I offer myself as 
a holocaust, it is still very little. Thou 
askest me for my heart Take it, O Lord. 
I give it to Thee. May it never again re- 
turn to my possession. 



Digitized by 



28 



FOURTH MEDITATION. 

SIN. 

I. Point 

We do not fear sin, because we do not 
sufficiently reflect upon its evil, for sin is 
called a turning away from God and a turn- 
ing to the creature; and it is in this with- 
drawal from God that the principal malice 
of sin consists. Alas ! how often you hav6 
withdrawn from this good God ! Ah ! my 
soul, is it possible that you could take pleas- 
ure in turning away from the Source of all 
good, in order to follow the path of sin ? 

II. Point 

Reflect that there are many unfortunate 
steps by which the soul descends to perdi- 
tion: ingratitude; attention to worldly af- 



Digitized by 



29 



fairs, which withdraw the mind from 
heavenly things; the habit of yielding 
to frivolous and superfluous thoughts; and 
a certain detestable custom of speaking 
ill of our neighbor. By remarking the 
faults of others, we lose shame for our 
own transgressions; we neglect to have 
recourse to God by prayer; and finally, 
we precipitate ourselves so deeply into 
sin that we coolly drink in iniquity like 
water. O soul, destined for eternal de- 
lights! I picture to you this unfortunate 
descent, that you may withdraw your feet 
from evil ways. 

III. Point 

Reflect that, like Cain, they are lost who 
do not aim at making a good confession, 
or who make it through routine without 
true sorrow for their sins and a firm purpose 
of amendment. They, on the contrary, are 



Digitized by 



30 



SIN. 



saved with the good thief and with Job 
who do not conceal their sins, but who sin- 
cerely accuse themselves of them. £h ! we 
sin in innumerable ways, by omission, 
commission, and inadvertence. Religious, 
removed from occasions of grievous sin, 
deceive themselves if they esteem their 
faults slight, and neglect to have compunc- 
tion for them. No matter how small the 
sin may be, it is a base ingratitude toward 
God, who knows fully the gravity of our 
faults, though we may not be aware of it. 

Affections. 

Come, my soul, let us draw near to God, 
for He receives sinners. Let us not leave 
our J esus. It L He who calls us. " Re- 
turn, return," says He, " erring children 
who forsake your Father." 0 Lord! be- 
hold I come to Thee, because Thou hast 
called me. Receive me according to Thy 



Digitized by 



sm 



31 



word, and I shall live. No never, Lord, 
with the help of Thy grace, never will I 
withdraw from Thee. Alas! I have 
sinned too frequently, but I now repent 
with all my heart. 

0 God of clemency, Thy mercy is greater 
than my iniquity! If Thou wouldst re- 
prove me according to Thy justice, what 
would become of me? I see that there is 
not one wicked step upon which I have not 
placed my foot. 0 my Father! I have 
sinned against heaven and before Thee. 
Though I am not worthy to be called Thy 
child, I still aspire to that happiness. 

0 Lord! assisted by Thy holy grace, 1 
will in future sorrowfully accuse myself of 
my sins. I will never again consider any 
fault trifling, since so great a God is of- 
fended by it. Ah, Lord ! Thou art patient 
and Thou dost defer the punishment of the 
sinner; but Thou wilt not remain silent, 



IIDigitiztd by 



32 



SIN. 



if he does not amend. Hence, 0 my 
wretched heart, annihilate yourself in con- 
trition and penance, by the consideration 
of the infinite goodness of God whom you 
have offended, and determine rather to die 
than to sin voluntarily. 0 Lord! Thou 
seest the weakness of my heart Strengthen 
me, that my resolution may become effi- 
cacious. 



Digitized by 



DEATH. 



33 



FIFTH MEDITATION. 

DEATH. 

I. Point. 

Kefleot, O mortals, that it would be a 
great offence against God to die without 
having thought of death. Death, which 
dominates over this perishable life, observes 
no fixed rules; at one time it takes this per- 
son, at another that, without choice or 
method, the good and the bad, the young 
and the old. O how blessed are they who 
live in a continual fear of death, and who 
are at all times prepared so to die, th#t 
they may live forever in that life in which 
there is no death ! 

II. Point 

Reflect that God, having placed us in 
the house of this world, will, on a day 



Digitized by 



34 



DEATH. 



known to Himself and of which we are 
ignorant, call us before Him with this sum- 
mons: " Give an account of thy steward- 
ship, of thy vows, of thy Eules, and observ- 
ances; in short, of all the possessions over 
which I have placed thee." Alas! what 
will be the outcome of this reckoning? I 
do not know; for all this is hidden in the 
future. 

III. Point. 

Reflect that the just man does not die 
an unprovided death, for he has amply 
provided for the dread moment by perse- 
vering in Christian integrity and in relig- 
ious obedience. Moreover, holy Church 
does not pray that we may not die a sudden, 
"but an unprovided, death. 

Affections. 

If the religious state secured us no other 
boon than that of a constant preparation 



Digitized by 



DEATH. 



85 



for death, we ought to hold it in great re- 
spect Alas! my soul, death teaches us 
every day that the glory of this world is 
naught but illusion and falsehood, and that 
the life of man passes away as a puff of 
wind. Come, then, let us cast ourselves 
at the feet of our immortal King, to whom 
death is more amiable than the life of all 
the kinffs of the earth. O sweet Jesus ! be- 
stow upon me that lasting remembrance of 
death which destroys sin, which humiliates 
me by causing me to think of the dust of 
the tomb, and which makes me despise all 
that is perishable. 

O blessed Father, St. Francis, you did 
not die an unprovided death, you who 
meditated so profoundly on death, who 
were so well prepared to hear the final 
summons, and who said: "I am about to 
prepare myself, to put myself in readiness 
for the great journey to eternity." Ah ! 



Digitized by 



36 



DEATH. 



that I may be faithful to the practice 
which you hare ordained for us, to regret 
the hours passed unprofitably, since we 
must render an account of all on the day 
of our death. Take care, 0 my dear soul, 
how you observe every rule and vow of 
your Institute; for I warn you that you 
must render an account of all to our sov- 
efeign Judge. O Jesus, remember that 
Thou art at the same time my Judge and 
my Father, my Saviour and my Exam- 
ine*! 

" Alas ! when I think how ill I have em* 
ployed the time of God, I am in doubt 
whether or not He will give me share 
in His eternal happiness, since He gives it 
only to those who employ well this present 
tfcne," exclaimed the holy Founder. If 
this faithful servant said this of himself, 
What should I, sinful spendthrift, say of 
myself? O my sweet Jesus, covered with 



Digitized by 



DEATH. 



confusion before Thee, I beseech Thee to 
enter not into an exact account with Thy 
servant; for who can withstand Thy tager ? 
Bather grant me this grace that, in imita- 
tion of my blessed Father, I may be so 
anxious to serve Thee well, that I may con- 
fidently abandon to Thee the entire care 
of my death. 



Digitized by 



38 



JUDGMENT. 



SIXTH MEDITATION. 

JUDGMENT. 

J. Point. 

Eefleot, O my soul, that you are truly 
senseless if you tremble not at the remem- 
brance of the Last Day, when consuming 
lire will go before the J udge, when thunder 
and whirlwinds will roar around Him, 
when the waters will rise and cast out fiery 
flames, and the monsters of the deep and 
the beasts of the earth will howl most 
frightfully. When the Judge shall appear, 
the heavens will be shaken, the stars will 
fall at His feet, the moon will become like 
blood, and the sun will be obscured. O 
God, what a convulsion of nature ! But it 
is God alone who does this, for the uni- 



Digitized by 



JUDGMENT. 



39 



verse is so noble that no one can destroy 
it save its Creator. 

II. Point. 

Reflect that God, being on the judgment 
seat, with all the nations of the world be- 
fore Him, will, like a shepherd, separate 
the goats from the sheep. He will, in an 
admirable manner, imprint on the minds 
of the reprobate dread of the loss which 
they are about to sustain. The divine 
Majesty will show them clearly the beauty 
of His face, and the treasures of His good- 
ness. At the sight of that infinite abyss of 
delight, their will, by a supreme effort, will 
seek to rush toward God, in order to unite 
itself to Him and to enjoy His love, but 
that will be impossible. From the instant 
that the divine beauty penetrates the un- 
derstanding of these unfortunate beings, 
the divine justice will so deprive their will 



Digitized by 



40 



JUDGMENT. 



of strength that it will be unable to love 
that most amiable Object They will hear 
this frightful sentence: " Depart from Me, 
you cursed, into everlasting fire I " 

III. Point. 

And the Judge turning to His dear 
sheep: " Come/' He will say, " ye blessed 
of My Father, possess the kingdom pre- 
pared for you." Then the commandment 
to love shall give way to the command ef 
happiness, and we shall see that the com- 
mandment of love, which the King Jesus 
gave to the citizens of Jerusalem militant^ 
was given only that they might merit citi- 
zenship in Jerusalem triumphant. 

Affections. 

O sovereign Judge, when Thou shalt 
have enclosed all humanity in eternity, 
Thou shalt break the shell of this visible 



Digitized by 



JUDGMENT. 



41 



world. I adore Thy power, but I invoke 
Thy mercy. For if on that day of Thy 
wrath the pillars of heaven are shakea, 
how greatly shall my poor heart be dis- 
turbed which, like a straw, is agitated by 
every wind? Alas> O good God! Thou 
wilt render to every one according to his 
works; therefore, I should strive only to 
do well, for that will be the day of Thy 
general reward. Yes, even the earth, O my 
God, which has supported Thy elect> will 
be changed in form, and made more trans- 
parent than a mirror; the sun will have 
seven times more light than it now pos- 
sesses, and the moon will be made bright 
as the sun. Oh, what happiness to behold 
the Bang, Jesus on the day of His triumph ! 

What do I say ! On that day, alas ! what 
advantage will it be to the wicked to see 
God, if they cannot love Him ? Lord \ de- 
liver me from that eternal misfortune and 



Digitized by 



42 



JUDGMENT. 



from the never-ending despair of those that 
will find themselves not only unable to love 
Thy goodness, but will even feel an aver- 
sion for it 

My soul, now is the time to judge, to 
condemn, to correct yourself, and to ac- 
quire the solid virtues of your vocation; 
for even if on that fearful day, you should 
be able to say: " Lord, I have raised the 
dead, I have wrought miracles in Thy 
name," you will not fail to hear these ter- 
rible words: " Go, worker of iniquity, I 
know you not, for you have not observed 
your vows and Rules." 

O holy and happy company, may you 
be eternally blessed ! Ah ! you are indeed 
blessed, because you have been docile and 
obedient as sheep. Grant, O sweet Jesus, 
my kind Master, that I may bless Thee 
during the course of this life by good 



digitized by 



JUDGMENT. 43 

works, so that Thou wilt bless me through- 
out eternity, and give a place at Thy 
right to the work of Thy hands* 



Digitized by 



44 



HELL. 



SEVENTH MEDITATION 

HELL. 

I. Point 

Reflect that, after the judgment^ the 
condemned souls will be united to their 
bodies, the accomplices of their guilt and 
the companions of their punishment^ and 
will enter into their loathsome abode, to 
dwell eternally in that place of darkness, 
in which horror and fearful confusion 
reign. 

II. Point 

The unfortunate beings will remain in 
their infernal prison, filled with despairing 
rage at the remembrance of that unpar- 
alleled happiness which they will never 
possess, because, when they could have 



Digitized =by:VJ OOQlC 



HELL. 



45 



loved and served God, they refused to do 
so. This teaches me that I should work 
whilst I have the light. 

III. Point. 

Eeflect that, above all their other tor- 
ments, they will burn with a thirst made 
the more violent by the remembrance of 
the eternal fountains. They will forever be 
like mad dogs, perishing with hunger, ren- 
dered all the more gnawing by the recol- 
lection of the eternal banquet of which they 
are deprived. Cursing one another, they 
will unite in blaspheming their Creator, for 
they know that for all eternity they will 
be utterly wretched. 

Affections. 

O God, when I behold Adam and Ev« 
departing from the terrestrial paradise (af- 
ter having been loaded with so many 



Digitized by 



46 



HELL. 



graces), crashed by the weight of their sins 
and full of misery, I am forced to exclaim: 
Who are they that are quitting paradise 
overwhelmed with woe? I am astounded. 
But, O Saviour of the world, I am still 
more astonished when I see a soul nour- 
ished in the paradise of the Church, en- 
riched with her treasures, susceptible of 
eternal happiness, descending through her 
own fault into eternal perdition. " Alas, O 
God, my God ! " I say, " She could have 
been Thy spouse, and behold she is Thy 
enemy! She could have enjoyed Thy 
Church triumphant, and behold, she is a 
citizen of the infernal Babylon ! " O sin ! 
O self-will ! It is you that have led this 
unfortunate creature into this disaster, and, 
consequently, it is you whom I detest with 
all my might 

Hasten, O religious souls, to serve God, 
to enter into the narrow way of all our 



Digitized by 



HELL. 



47 



observances, for it conducts to life. 0 my 
sweet Jesus ! turn away my feet from that 
broad and deceitful route, a route sensual, 
wilful, and worldly, which conducts to eter- 
nal death, and upon which so many enter. 
Preserve me from following the broad and 
tortuous path which leads hypocrites to per- 
dition. 

" O religious souls ! you have so many 
means to perfeet yourselves, you are on the 
mystical ladder which reaches to heaven. 
Alas! if, through your own unworthiness, 
you cast yourselves into the eternal abyss, 
if you are profoundly buried therein, it 
will be in the lowest depths," says a holy 
contemplative. O most blessed Virgin, 
never permit that any one of the sheep of 
your flock be rejected with the infernal 
goats and wolves. 

O Mother of all sweetness, I fly from 
hell, because there you and your Son are 



Digitized by 



48 



HELL. 



not loved. The blessed would consider 
themselves damned, if they were for a 
moment deprived of this love. O Mother 
of fair love, grant that I may begin so to 
love, as for all eternity to love your divine 
Son! 



Digitized by 



HE A VEN. 



49 



EIGHTH MEDITATION. 

HEAVEN. 

I. Point. 

Reflect that God, who is more inclined 
to reward than to punish, will bestow in- 
finite glory upon His elect; He will place 
them in, His triumphant kingdom. O how 
delightful is this abode! It is a paradise 
of beauty, splendor, and happiness. " O 
city of God, holy Jerusalem/' says St. 
* Augustine, " how transported will my soul 
be to behold thy glory, thy beauty, thy 
gates, thy walls, thy streets! Thy man- 
sions are of precious stones, thy gates of 
fine pearls, thy streets of most pure gold; 
nothing enters into thee which is not most 
perfect. In short, 0 holy Jerusalem, thou 



Digitized by 



50 



HEAVEN. 



art truly beautiful, and sweet in thy de- 
lights." 

II. Point. 

Reflect how good it is to see this city, in 
which the great King is seated on His 
throne, surrounded by His blessed servants. 
There we behold the choirs of angels sing- 
ing hymns, and the full assembly of the 
celestial citizens; there are the venerable 
troop of prophets, the full number of the 
apostles, the victorious army of innumer- 
able martyrs, the august rank of pontiffs, 
the sacred body of confessors, the true and 
perfect religious, holy women, humble 
widows, pure virgins. Their glory is not 
equal; but their bliss is the same, for in 
heaven reigns full and perfect charity. 

III. Point 

Reflect that for all eternity these blessed 
souls will enjoy supreme happiness; that 



Digitized by 



HEAVEN. 



51 



God gives Himself to them in His entirety; 
and that the eternal Son says benignly to 
His Father: " Father, I wish that they 
whom Thou hast given Me may remain 
eternally with Me, and that they may be- 
hold the light which I received from Thee 
before the creation of the world." And 
addressing His dear children: "Have I not 
told you that whoever would love Me, 
would be loved by My Father, and that 
we would manifest ourselves to him?" 
Then this holy company, inundated with 
delight in the bosom of the divinity, will 
chant an eternal Alleluia of gratitude and 
praise to their Creator. 

Affections. 

I salute you from afar, 0 my holy 
mother Jerusalem, filled with all beauty, 
illuminated by the Sun of justice! The 
pure and immaculate Lamb is your beauti- 



Digitized by 



52 



HEAVEN. 



ful and resplendent light, your brightness, 
and all your beatitude. O God of life, how 
desirable is Thy palace! That is the place 
in which Thou diff usest Thy delights. Ah ! 
wretched moment of this mortal life, I can- 
not love you, except so far as you aid me 
to arrive at this blessed eternity. Alas! 
how wearisome to me is the earth, and how 
displeasing are its pleasures, when I turn 
my eyes toward you, O my beloved Sion ! 

Blessed courtiers of this great King, you 
realize now, in the joy of Our Lord, that 
he who is faithful in little is placed over 
many things. Ah, tell me by what path 
have you arrived at this happy abode? 
Some by patience, by faith, by hope, by 
meekness, but all and every one by charity 
and humility. I am placed here below to 
ascend the same steps by the practice of the 
holy virtues. Grant me your assistance, 
lest my frailty should cause me rather to 



Digitized by 



HE A VEN. 58 

fall back than to ascend to your much de- 
sired and beautiful assembly. 

Courage, my soul, let us labor and com- 
bat ! The blessed kingdom is bestowed only 
upon conquerors. But, O my God, Thou 
art my beatitude, therefore I desire Thee 
alone, Thou God of paradise, and not the 
paradise of God. Ah, what a favor, to 
behold forever the Spouse in His glory, the 
Lord face to face, to love and to bless Him 
eternally I 



Digitized by 



54 RELWIO US PO VERTT. 



NINTH MEDITATION. 

BELIGIOUS POVERTY. 

I. Point. 

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs 
is the kingdom of heaven; cursed, there- 
fore, are the rich in spirit^ who are attached 
to the things of this world, for the misery 
of hell is their portion. Tou have vowed 
poverty. O how happy you are if you ob- 
serve it faithfully, and how honored should 
you not regard yourself to belong to so 
blessed a company ! Our Lord, Our Lady, 
St. Joseph, were poor; love, then, this holy 
virtue as the dear friend of Jesus Christ, 
who lived and died in poverty. 

II. Point* 

Eeflect that to be poor means to be in 



Digitized by 



RELIGIO US PO VERTY. 55 



need, to want many things. Behold the 
example of the poor and divine Jesus: 
"The foxes," says He, "have their dens 
in the forest; and the birds of the air, nests; 
but the Son of man has no place whereon 
to rest His head." O Religious ! who have 
vowed to be poor with Jesus Christ, do 
you not blush with shame for wishing at 
all times to have your desires gratified and 
to want for nothing? You should desire 
and rejoice to want even the necessaries of 
life. You should, I repeat, be delighted, 
if like your Spouse you have not whereon 
to rest your head. 

III. Point 

Weigh seriously the obligation of your 
vow. You should live not only in perfect 
abnegation of the things that you use, but 
still more in poverty, entirely despoiled of 
all things, according to your Constitutions. 



Digitized by 



56 RELIGIO US PO VERTY. 

By which you should remember that a Re- 
ligious injures herself, and is not poor, who 
is attached to time, to places, to creatures, 
to esteem, to consolations. All these things 
constitute her riches; and, as a matter of 
fact, she is not possessed of that nudity of 
heart and poverty of spirit of which she 
makes profession. 

'Affections. 

I return thanks to Thee, O Lord, since 
Thy goodness has placed me in this abode 
where, among Thy spouses, the words thine 
and mine are not heard except on this one 
occasion, in which the loving soul is per- 
mitted to exclaim: "My Beloved is all 
mine ! " Ah, Lord ! give me a true love for 
this much esteemed poverty with all its 
wants and inconveniences. Defend me 
from the ambition that too frequently de- 
sires the honor of being considered poor, 



Digitized by 



RELIGIOUS POVERTY. 57 



while at the same time enjoying all the 
conveniences of wealth. 

O my God ! I should humble myself pro- 
foundly at seeing Thee, the King of all 
things, having not even a place whereon 
to rest Thy head, and myself, miserable 
worm of the earth, so well provided with all 
necessaries. My ingratitude attains to this 
degree, that in a convent, the holy house of 
the pbor, I look for superfluities and all the 
conveniences appertaining to wprldlings, 
although, perhaps, I did not enjoy them 
when in the world. O Lord! who em- 
braced poverty for love of me, I throw my- 
self at Thy feet in order to repent of this 
disorder. 

Yes, O Lord, I wish to observe my vow 
with great fidelity. I shall cherish and con- 
ceal between Thee and myself the small 
privations that may befall me. I shall love 
vile and coarse things, as truly appertain- 



Digitized by 



58 RELIGIOUS PO VERTY. 



ing to me. In short, I beg of Thee this 
grace, that during the remainder of my life 
I may be poor in my employments, at work, 
in food, in clothing, in sickness, in health, 
and in everything. 

God of all goodness, who said in ancient 
times: " I do not wish that they who serve 
in My temple should possess an inheritance; 
for I desire to be their portion." O my 
Lord ! why is it that so many Keligious do 
not possess Thee, if not because they wish 
to possess something else? Come, then, my 
soul, let us strip ourselves of everything. 
Depart from me, possessions and conven- 
iences of the body; begone, vain consola- 
tions; depart, superfluous affections; hence- 
forth I desire to live in total privation of all 
things. I wish to render my vows to God, 
who is my portion, my heritage, my eternal 
possession, and whom I shall enjoy the less 
the more I enjoy anything but Him. 



Digitized by 



OBEDIENCE. 



59 



TENTH MEDITATION. 

OBEDIENCE. 

I. Point. 

Reflect that you have vowed religious 
obedience. It is an entire surrender (says 
St. Climacus) of all human desires; a vol- 
untary death, a life without curiosity, an 
assured road which seeks no excuse be- 
fore God, a secure voyage, a tomb of self- 
will, and a giving life to humility. Ah, 
how badly you have practised a virtue so 
exalted ! If you do not observe it as you 
should, you will expose your soul to all 
the sins opposed to the above-mentioned 
virtue. 

II. Point. 

In order to animate yourself still further 
to the practice of this holy virtue, consider 



Digitized by 



60 OBEDIENCE. 



our sweet Jesus in the house of St. Joseph, 
retired from the world, and obedient in 
all things. There it was that He originated 
the monastic life. But, my God, in what 
does He obey ? In things low and vile, in 
helping to draw a saw, or handle a plane, 
He, the God of majesty and glory! And 
we, poor insignificant creatures, abject be- 
yond expression, hesitate to obey if some 
glory and satisfaction are not connected 
with our act of obedience. 

III. Point 

Kevolve in your mind these blessed 
words of Our Saviour: " I am not come 
into the world to do My own will, but that 
of My Father who sent Me; " and say: " 0 
my God, I have not entered the convent 
to do my will, but that of my celestial 
Father, who sent me hither by His inspira- 
tions, which I behold in my Eules, in my 



. ; Digitized by 



OBEDIENCE. 



61 



observances, and in all that my Superiors 
ordain for me." Assuredly, the Eeligious 
who wishes to do her own will in the con- 
vent does not imitate her divine Spouse; 
therefore, on the Day of J udgment she will 
deserve to be judged with worldlings 
and the refractory. O God, what confu- 
sion! 

Affections. 

Lord, I admit that in obedience all is 
safe, and that out of it all is precarious. 
Alas ! I have acted very wrongfully in al- 
lowing my self-will to live! I have re- 
nounced my vows and my profession. Ah, 
what a misfortune! I have resumed the 
care of self, after having abandoned my- 
self entirely to Thee. 0 Lord ! I repent of 
my fault. Henceforth, casting myself into 
the arms of obedience and of my Superi- 
ors, I resolve, with the assistance of Thy 



Digitized by 



62 



OBEDIENCE. 



grace, to walk blindly, regarding not where 
they lead me, but only the assured path in 
which I walk, namely, to Thy blessed eter- 
nity. 

O my sweet and obedient Saviour ! how 
deluded I have been to prefer obedience 
in great to obedience in small matters ! No, 
my God, do not permit this misfortune to 
befall me, but cause me to regard with the 
eyes of faith lowly things as exercises in 
which I can more easily imitate Thy holy 
humanity, abased and humiliated. Never 
permit me, therefore, to murmur at any- 
thing that may be commanded, nor to crit- 
icise the employments that may be given 
me; but, with sincere affection, may I con- 
sider that my food and my sweetest nour- 
ishment is in all things to practise holy 
obedience ! 

O self-judgment, betrayer of my will, 
it is time for me to crush you, else you will 



Digitized by 



OBEDIENCE. 



63 



annihilate me. Ah, my God ! I do not wish 
to restrain my own will because at all times 
it leads me into evil, but because it pre- 
vents me from following Thee. O Thou 
who wert obedient unto death, even unto 
the death of the cross, grant that I may 
live and die only by obedience ! Our Sav- 
iour did not desire to do His own most 
blessed will. Shall I ever, then, dare to 
do my will, which is altogether corrupt? 



Digitized by 



64 



CHASTITY. 



ELEVENTH MEDITATION. 

CHASTITY. 

I. Point 

Consider the favor that God has done 
you in choosing you for His spouse, since 
a woman ordinarily changes her condition 
for that of her husband, and becomes a 
queen if he is a king. Eeflect with what 
reverence you should esteem this grace. 
"They have become abominable as the 
things that they have loved," says the 
Prophet, speaking of the wicked. And we 
can say of the good, that they become as 
amiable as the things that they love. 

II. Point 

Behold to what happiness God has called 
you ! They who live in the world run great 



Digitized by 



CHASTITY. 



65 



risk of offering to God a divided heart 
and, consequently, of hearing the heavenly 
Spouse refuse it, saying: "No one can 
serve two masters." But souls that have 
absolutely left all in order to consecrate 
themselves to God, are delivered from that 
danger. They should secure the door of 
their heart with the bar of a chaste fear, 
that nothing may enter therein but what 
relates to the love and service of their 
Spouse. 

III. Point. 
Eevolve in your mind the interior per- 
fection to which this vow obliges you. Be- 
fleet upon the words of your Kule, which 
gives you no other liberty than that of liv- 
ing, sighing, and breathing but for your 
celestial Spouse. If you are obliged to hold 
converse with others, let it be immaculate 
and angelic. Ah, how blessed are the pure 
of heart, for they shall see God I 



Digitized by 



66 



CHASTITY. 



Affections. 

O Jesus, dear Spouse of pure souls ! I 
admire the excess of Thy goodness which, 
having made choice of me for a dignity 
so great as to be Thy spouse, has not re- 
jected me, although I have so frequently 
been wanting in fidelity. I return a thou- 
sand thanks to Thy sovereign sweetness. 
My soul, humble yourself profoundly be- 
fore the great army of virgins who follow 
the Lamb and His blessed Mother whither- 
soever they go. Supplicate them to offer 
you to Jesus, the King of virgins. Let us 
be devout to our good angel, for these ce- 
lestial spirits take pleasure in guarding the 
bed of King Solomon, namely, the soul 
that is pure, humble, devout, and faithful. 

My Beloved, in order to keep the garden 
of my heart for Thee alone, grant me the 
grace to surround it with the thorns of 



Digitized by 



CHASTITY. 



67 



holy mortification and to close the doors 
and windows of my senses, so that not one 
of my thoughts may stray out. Grant, also, 
that my entire soul may remain exclusively 
occupied with Thee, 0 my only Consola- 
tion, my most sweet Ettreat ! 

"When shall it be, O my God, that, as- 
sisted by Thy grace, I shall walk in my 
way according to the full extent of my ob- 
ligations, and that the words of my vows 
shall be always before my eyes, so that, 
avoiding distractions, immortification of the 
senses, useless preoccupation of mind, I may 
aspire after and breathe but for Thee? 
Grant me this grace, O my most dear God ! 
May the things of this world turn into 
bitterness and mortification for me, that 
Thou alone mayst be balm to my soul, and 
that my thoughts may find pleasure but 
in Thy sovereign sweetness ! 



Digitized by 



68 OUR MISERY AND WEAKNESS. 



TWELFTH MEDITATION. 

TO ASSIST US TO KNOW OUR MISERY AND 
WEAKNESS. 

I. Point 

What is a human being but miserable 
smoke which is soon dissipated, or, as Job 
says, " a leaf of a tree agitated by the wind, 
the sport of evils, inconstancy without 
firmness, and in the end the prey of the 
tomb" ? Still more, this misery has attained 
to such a degree by the liberty of his de- 
praved will, that it converts almost every- 
thing into his own wretchedness, and, 
finally, breaks his neck on the sharp stone 
placed for his support and protection. 

II. Point. 

Eeflect that> being so impotent, what can 



Digitized by 



OUR MISERY AND WEAKNESS. 69 



you do of yourself i Ah ! you can do much 
evil and no good. You can fall into a thou^ 
sand sins, and remain in this lamentable 
condition without being able to arise from 
it of yourself, until Our Lord, by sending 
light, fears, remorse, and salutary warn- 
ings, makes you return to Him. Exclaim, 
then, with St. Augustine: " O Lord, with- 
out Thee I can die, but without Thee never 
shall I be able to find the road to life." 

III. Point 

Keflect, moreover, that your frailty is 
so intense that, being on the road of vir- 
tue, you could not walk of yourself, if Our 
Lord did not continually watch over you. 
You would disgrace yourself at every mo- 
ment, and in the end you would go astray. 

O religious souls, beware that Our Lord 
does not address this reproach to you: 
"Israel was weak, and I conducted her 



Digitized by 



70 OUR MISERY AND WEAKNESS. 

Myself; but she escaped from My hand, 
and she is lost" 

Affections. 

O Lord, come to my aid! Make haste 
to help me! Alas! I am but an atom, a 
nothing, and I desire to elevate myself. 

O my God, I exclaim with David, Thou 
art my Father, my God, and the rock of 
my salvation ! Deliver me from the guid- 
ance of my self-will, and let Thy right 
hand support Thy foolish servant. 

But, O my God, if in my misery I should 
chance to fall into the dreadful precipice 
of sin, do Thou regard me with a favorable 
eye! Without Thy assistance, I cannot 
even form the thought of leaving that 
abyss. My dear soul, understand your mis- 
ery and, in consequence of it, remain pro- 
foundly humble and dependent upon your 
divine Spouse. 



Digitized by 



OUR MISERY AND WEAKNESS. 71 

Lord, I acknowledge that my beginning, 
my perseverance, and my end depend upon 
Thee. Ah, if Thy goodness had not long 
assisted me in the past, I should have per- 
ished ! O Leader of Israel, never, with the 
aid of Thy grace, will I leave Thy sweet 
hand, which guides and conducts me by the 
way of Thy holy will. Ah ! rather, Lord, 
let Thy right hand be placed under my 
head, and Thy left hand embrace me ! Then 
I shall see that I have nothing but what 
I have received from Thy bounty. In 
what can I glory except in being nothing, 
and in proclaiming that my God is all 
things to me? 



Digitized by 



72 OUR SAVIOUR'S SUBMISSION. 



THIRTEENTH MEDITATION. 

THE SUBMISSION" THAT OUR SAVIOUR PRAC- 
TISED IN HIS DIVINE INFANCY. 

I. , Point. 

Consider, in the first place, the sub- 
mission of the eternal Son to the will of 
His heavenly Father, knowing that He 
wished to save mankind. He offered Him- 
self, He condescended to come upon earth, 
and to conceal Himself in the chaste womb 
of the most blessed Virgin. He who was 
greatness itself, omnipotent* omniscient, 
all-perfect, did not refuse, or as the Church 
sings, He had no horror of that narrow and 
obscure prison, because such was the will 
of His Father. 

II. Point. 

Eeflect that our good Saviour, hav- 



Digitized by 



OUR SAVIOUR'S SUBMISSION. 73 

ing submitted to the office of Re- 
deemer of men, submitted absolutely to 
all that depended thereon. He was 
satisfied to hide His eternal wisdom 
under the veil of infancy; and He, the un- 
created "Word, condescended to keep silence 
until He had attained the age at which 
other children speak. In short, that rich, 
strong, immortal One condescended to ap- 
pear as poor and as weak as His own crea- 
tures; and I, a wretched worm of the earth, 
I wish to show myself, I wish to speak, I 
wish to exalt myself ! 

III. Point 

Reflect to what a degree the submission 
of our divine Saviour extended, since the 
Evangelist says that He was obedient to the 
Blessed Virgin and to the glorious St. 
Joseph. He abandoned Himself entirely to 
their guidance, to be taken up, to be car- 



Digitized by 



U 0072 SAVIOUR'S SUBMISSION. 

ried, to be put down, with total indiffer- 
ence, for the reason, doubtless, that He re- 
garded them as persons commissioned by 
His eternal Father to protect Him in His 
sacred infancy. 

Affections. 

O eternal God, Father of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who for our good sent Thy Son 
down from heaven to assume our life, in 
order that He might bestow upon us His 
own life, fill my heart with affections of 
gratitude, and my lips with acts of thanks- 
giving in return for this benefit. O sweet 
Jesus ! if, according to my unworthiness, I 
might imitate Thy submission, how happy 
I should be! When obedience sends me 
here or leaves me there, or destines me 
for any occupation, I should find no place 
too humble, too inconvenient; all should 
be acceptable to my will, if it was submis- 



Digitized by 



OUR SAVIOUR'S SUBMISSION. 75 



sive to that of my heavenly Father. Is 
it possible, 0 my God ! that I behold Thee 
undertake so much for me, and that I am 
willing to undertake nothing for Thee? 
You must, my dear soul, be courageous, in 
order to imitate your Spouse, and ascend 
to Him by this happy descent of submission 
and resignation of self. 

0 my Lord ! since in obedience to Thee 
I have followed my religious vocation, I 
now wish in imitation of Thee and assisted 
by Thy grace and Thy example, to submit 
myself to all that depends upon and apper- 
tains to my state of life. Being nothing, 
I desire to appear as nothing; having be- 
come a little child in order to gain the king- 
dom of heaven, I shall remain in silence, 
not knowing, as it were, how to speak ex- 
cept through charity or necessity. Behold 
the desires of my heart ! But, O sweet and 
divine Infant! I expect from Thee and 



Digitized by 



76 OUR SAVIOUR'S SUBMISSION. 

not from myself the grace, the strength, 
and the fidelity of which I have need to 
accomplish my purpose. 

What dost Thou teacl me, O my divine 
Master, by Thy submission to the blessed 
Virgin and to St. Joseph, except to ask 
for nothing and to refuse nothing, and to 
remain wholly dependent on the will and 
direction of the Superiors that my heavenly 
Father has placed over me? Ah, my God, 
how ashamed I should be to see Thee obe- 
dient in all things and myself so frequently 
rebellious ! Permit no longer, O Lord, this 
misfortune to befall me, but grant me the 
favor that, while adoring Thy submission, 
I may begin the practice of the same holy 
virtue. 



Digitized by 



THE INCOMPARABLE GRACE. 77 



FOURTEENTH MEDITATION. 

THE INCOMPARABLE GRACE THAT WE POSSESS 
IN BEING DAUGHTERS OF HOLY CHURCH. 

J. Point 

Consider that Jesus Christ came into 
this world to establish His holy Church, 
the Mother of all the children of salvation. 
It is a work so excellent that He consti- 
tuted Himself its architect. " Blessed art 
thou," said He, " thou art Peter, and on 
this rock I will build My Church, and the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it." 

II. Point. 

Behold the majesty and sanctity of this 
Church. Jesus is her Head, and she is 
His matchless spouse. Whoever is not a 
child of this holy Mother cannot be a child 



Digitized by 



78 THE INCOMPARABLE GRACE. 



of God. 0 how rich she is ! The keys of 
heaven are bestowed upon her, the sacra- 
ments are her treasures, and Jerusalem 
triumphant is her sister. 

III. Point. 

Consider the incomparable grace that 
God has granted you in making you daugh- 
ters of this Church. This reflection formed 
all the glory of the saints. " I value noth- 
ing," said St. Catharine, " except to be a 
Christian." And a martyr sang when dy- 
ing: "lam the son of a Mother, the most 
holy Church, whose true children can 
never die." St. Teresa could not sufficiently 
thank God for being a daughter of His 
Church. 

St. Francis de Sales made his happiness 
in this world consist in laboring, and even 
sacrificing his life, for the service of this 
true spouse of J esus Christ. " Ah ! " he 



Digitized by Google 



THE INCOMPARABLE GRACE. 79 

exclaimed, "how incomparably animated 
do I feel my courage to serve more faith- 
fully than ever the Church of the living 
God, and the living God of the Church," 
In short, all the saints had no other de- 
light They were consumed with grat- 
itude; and you very probably have never 
thought of returning thanks to God for 
so signal a benefit. 

Affections. 

"Were my heart to melt with love and 
thanksgiving toward Thee, O Lord, for 
having built this Church for us, I would 
not yet have fulfilled my obligation. When 
I reflect upon the thought, I cannot re- 
frain from exclaiming with David: " Bless- 
ed be the work of the hands of my God; 
and may He be ever blessed in His work." 

I salute you, incomparable dove without 
stain, pillar of strength, house of the King ! 



Digitized by 



80 THE INCOMPARABLE GRACE. 



Mother most benign, who dost receive re- 
pentant sinners and reconcile them to God ! 
Mother most sweet, who dost feed her chil- 
dren with the bread of life and make 
them drink even of the blood of the 
Spouse! Ah, why should I not love my 
religious vocation ! Assuredly, O my God, 
I believe that Thou hast given it to me, 
that I may become a most devoted daughter 
of so glorious a Mother. O holy spouse of 
the divine Spouse ! assisted by your grace, 
I desire to embrace all your maxims, and 
to drink of your doctrine as a beverage of 
salvation. 

My soul, be confounded ! O Lord, what 
am I that Thoi hast placed me in this tab- 
ernacle of the just, among the assembly of 
Thy glorious apostles, of Thy victorious 
martyrs, of Thy venerable pontiffs and 
confessors, of Thy most pure virgins and 
of all Thy beloved elect ! I confess, O my 



Digitized by 



THE INCOMPARABLE GRACE. 81 



God, that it is the grace of graces, and that 
Thy predilection alone has imparted it to 
ma 0 holy assembly of the elect of my 
Saviour Jesus, who will obtain for me this 
favor, except my God, that by your prayers, 
I may not become unworthy of your soci- 
ety; but that rather in this world, as a 
generous daughter of the Church, I may 
never cease to triumph over myself and 
make progress in virtue, until I reach Jeru- 
salem triumphant in your sweet company. 



Digitized by 



82 THE RELIGIOUS VOCATION. 



FIFTEENTH MEDITATION, 

THE PARTICULAR BENEFIT OF THE RELIGIOUS 
VOCATION. 

I. Point 

Eefleot that Solomon, having regarded 
all things that are under the heavens, pro- 
tests that " all is vanity, and affliction of 
spirit" What, then, do we leave for God 
when we enter the religions life ? Nothing 
but phantoms and appearances of good; 
and if the prophets inform us that all 
things are as if they did not exist before 
Thee, if all is but nothing, O my God, what 
have we left personally? Our misery is 
always extreme. We are so blind that we 
persuade ourselves that we have done great 
things for Thee in abandoning these noth- 



Digitized by 



THE RELIGIOUS VOCATION. 83 



ings, while all the time it is Thou, O Lord, 
who hast done great things for us in lead- 
ing us to renounce them. 

II. Point. 

Eeflect that you were not capable of 
choosing a vocation so holy. It is God who, 
in BHs incomparable love, has called you 
to it, constraining you without violence to 
depart from Sodom and to enter into His 
banquet. The religious life is not a nat- 
ural one. It is elevated above nature. It 
is, therefore, necessary that grace should 
bestow it and be its soul. 

III. Point. 

Consider what gratitude you should tes- 
tify to our divine Lord and Saviour, who 
has deigned through the instrumentality of 
His blessed Mother, to change the water 
of your life into wine; that is, to turn 
your faults into virtues, and to make you 



Digitized by 



84 THE RELIGIOUS VOCATION. 



all His. Ask of God great thankfulness 
for this grace, which is not less than the 
grace of vocation. The ingratitude of the 
children of Israel, withdrawn from the 
bondage of Egypt into the solitude of the 
desert, so greatly irritated the Lord that 
He wished to exterminate them one and 
all. 

Affections. 
Lord, what have I left in quitting the 
world, but poverty full of care, or some 
miserable possession full of inquietude ? I 
have abandoned trouble, anguish, dissen- 
sion, continual occasions of losing my soul; 
and Thou hast given me a life sweet, tran- 
quil, full of holy union and furnished with 
a thousand means of raising my soul to 
Thee. O my God ! I admit that Thou hast 
done much for me, and that I have done 
nothing for Thee, by entering upon this vo- 
cation. I am a useless servant; moreover, 



Digitized by 



THE RELIGIOUS VOCATIOK. 85 



I am ungrateful, if I do not fulfil the end 
for which Thou didst call me to Thy 
blessed service. 

What return shall I make to Thee, 0 
my God, for this most precious benefit 
which Thou hast bestowed upon me? I 
will fulfil my vows to Thee by a punctual 
observance before all Thy people; that is 
to say, O my King, that, assisted by Thy 
grace, I will live the life of a trueEeligious, 
my soul at all times elevated to Thee, do- 
ing continual violence to nature, loving 
self-contempt, never blaming those that 
blame me, nor leaving the strait and nar- 
row road which conducts to life eternal. 
O most blessed Virgin ! since it is by your 
intercession that I have received the grace 
to dwell in your house all the days of my 
life, help me to live there in such a manner 
that you will not refuse to acknowledge 
me as your daughter. 



Digitized by 



86 THE RELIGIOUS VOCATION. 



Lord, Thou didst say in times past: 
" What can I do for Israel that I have not 
done? " Ah! it seems to me that the fol- 
lowing words are addressed to my soul: 
" O thoughtless Religious, what has Our 
Lord not done for you? And you do not 
return the gratitude due Him. Oh! you 
should delight to find yourself out of 
Egypt, to keep yourself amorously retired, 
to fly from everything that appertains to 
the world; but on the contrary, you irri- 
tate your Spouse by seeking more earnestly, 
perhaps, your satisfactions and conven- 
iences than you did when in the world." O 
my Beloved, I admit that I have not de- 
served to taste Thy sweet manna. But for 
the future I renounce everything; I am 
dead to the world. A thousand times I 
bless the day on which I died, in order to 
live only for Thee. 



Digitized by 



IMITATING OUR SAVIOUR. 87 



SIXTEENTH MEDITATION. 

THE OBLIGATION IMPOSED BY THE RELIGIOUS 
LIFE OF STBICTLY IMITATING OUB SAVIOUB. 

I„ Point. 

Consideb that Our Saviour when calling 
His disciples, always said to them: " Fol- 
low Me." "When they were fishing, like 
St. Peter and St. Andrew; or mending their 
nets, like the children of Zebedee; or at 
the counting-house, like St. Matthew, — all 
received the same summons: "Follow 
Me." From this I learn that all who are 
called to the religious life and to evangel- 
ical perfection, are called to imitate the 
Saviour in His humanity, and to practise 
virtue after His example. 

II. Point 

Reflect in what manner you should fol- 



Digitized by 



88 IMITATING OUR SAVIOUR. 

low Our Saviour. Learn it from His own 
words: "Whoever will come after Me," 
says He, " let him deny himself and fol- 
low Me." But, O divine Saviour ! whither 
shall we follow Thee? Throughout Thy 
entire life Thou didst tread the road of 
perfect poverty, of contempt humiliation 
and abjection before creatures, and of in- 
cessant labor. Is it in this way that we 
should follow Thee? Is it in these paths 
that the Religious obliges herself to follow 
in Thy footprints? O immense, but pre- 
cious, abnegation! 

III. Point. 

Consider into what a misfortune they 
fall who, after having consecrated them- 
selves to Thee, O my Saviour, and having 
commenced to follow Thee, turn back 
" Alas ! " says He, " they are no more fit 
for the kingdom of heaven " than they who 



Digitized by 



IMITATING OUR SAVIOUR. 89 

practise virtue on some occasions only and 
hesitate on others. "I say to you weep- 
ing," said the fervent St. Paul, " that there 
are some among you who walk enemies of 
Jesus Christ, whose end is perdition." 

Affections. 

O Lord, of whom it is written, that, hav- 
ing ascended the mountain, Thou didst call 
to Thee those whom Thou didst desire to 
be Thy disciples ! Ah ! I come to Thee on 
the mount of religious perfection, because 
Thou hast called me. Eeceive me accord- 
ing to Thy word and I shall live. But, my 
sweet Saviour, how shall I follow Thee — 
Thou who, the Prophet assures us, hast come 
from the highest heavens to run Thy course 
in this world as a giant ? Ah ! Thou Thyself 
must be my strength and my fleetness. 0 
negligent Eeligious ! why do you follow 
your Spouse at such a distance? Do you 



Digitized by 



90 IMITATING OUR SAVIOUR. 



not care to approach Him? If you wish 
to reach Him, follow Him without hesita- 
tion; for in following Him, whoever hesi- 
tates goes back; whoever does not advance 
recedes. 

O self, I renounce you, as only on this 
condition can I follow my Jesus. O holy 
cross of my vocation, I embrace you with 
my whole soul, since it is with you and by 
you I must follow my Spouse. Divine 
Spouse! who trod the paths of a life hid- 
den, afflicted, suffering, and despised, di- 
late my heart, that I may run after Thee 
on this blessed road. O religious souls! 
if you would turn away from all distrac- 
tions, if you would renounce yourselves ab- 
solutely, the fragrance of the Beloved, His 
sacred example, would draw you, and you 
would run after the odor of His divine 
perfumes. 

Oh, what a deplorable thing to behold 



Digitized by 



1M1TA TING 0 UR SA VIO UR. 91 



so many slothful and lukewarm souls, who 
hesitate at every moment on the road of 
perfection! O Divine Master! who hast 
called me because of Thy love for me, grant 
by Thy grace that I may follow Thee, not 
at a distance, but close on Thy steps accord- 
ing to my ability. O religious soul, let the 
dead bury the dead; but you who have 
found your Jesus, your life and your way, 
follow Him! 



Digitized by 



92 0 VR SA VIO U&S LESSONS. 



SEVENTEENTH MEDITATION. 

THE PRINCIPAL LESSONS THAT OUR SAVIOUB 
TEACHES THE RELIGIOUS SOUL. 

I. Point 

Consider that our meek Jesus, having 
come into the world and established the 
religious life, gives as His first lesson to 
His beloved novices: " Learn of Me, for I 
am meek and humble of Heart, and you 
shall find rest for your souls." O my soul ! 
cast yourself at the feet of your Spouse. 
Listen to His divine doctrine of meekness, 
humility, and peace. Ponder on it in the 
depth of your heart, and make it the basis 
of your piety, your perfection, and your 
salvation. 



Digitized by 



0 UR SA VIO UR'S LESSONS, 93 



II. Point 

Passing on to another lesson of perfec- 
tion, let us hear what Jesus says to all His 
disciples: "Unless you become as little 
children, you shall not enter into the king- 
dom of heaven." O lesson of innocence, 
of simplicity, of uprightness, of perfect 
submission ! What, O Lord ! if we are not 
like little children, we shall not enter into 
the kingdom of heaven? Ah! that is a 
threat. We do not sufficiently weigh its 
importance. 

III. Point. 

As the third precept this good Master 
teaches that we must work, pray without 
ceasing, and abound in good works. " You, 
My disciples, I have planted in My evan- 
gelical ground; but all who do not bear 
fruit will be plucked up and cast into the 



Digitized by 



U 0 UB SA VIO UR'S LE8S0NS. 

fire. Eemain in My presence. live with 
Me as the branch on the vine, that you may 
produce fruits worthy of your holy voca- 
tion; for My Father, who is the heavenly 
Vine-dresser, will cut off all branches that 
bear no fruit." It is to you, O my soul, that 
these words are addressed. Weigh them 
in the scales of the sanctuary, and pass them 
not lightly over. 

Affections. 

O holy Founder, you love us more with 
less of other virtues and more humility, 
than with more of other virtues and less 
humility. O come with your powerful in- 
tercession, to help my weakness ! O obtain 
for me sincere humility of heart, for pride 
and self-esteem have so dulled the ears of 
my soul, that these holy lessons have not 
penetrated it. O meek Jesus! O humble 
Jesus ! if we are obliged to learn these di- 



Digitized by 



OUR SAVIOUR'S LESSONS. 



95 



vine virtues from Thee, with what degree 
of perfection should we not practise them ? 
Everywhere I behold Thee meek and hum- 
ble, in Thy life, in Thy conversation, in 
Thy works, and even in Thy death. 

O my soul, will you not take to heart se- 
riously this holy infancy and simplicity, 
since the Holy Ghost dwells not in deceit- 
ful souls, and they shall not dwell eternally 
in heaven. Withdraw, then, from me, 
worldly prudence, human respect, the 
opinion of creatures, love of self! Such 
considerations enter not into the mind of 
an innocent child, my model of simplicity. 
O Lord, if I possess this cherished virtue, 
Thou wilt take me lovingly into Thy di- 
vine arms, for the simple of heart are the 
.children of love. 

Little will it profit me, O divine Sav- 
iour! to have been planted in the fertile 
soil of holy religion; for if I bear not fruits 



Digitized by 



96 0 UR SA VIO UR'S LESSONS. 



worthy of life eternal, Thou wilt pluck rue 
out. 0, may this misfortune never happen 
to me ! And in order that the grace of iny 
vocation may not be in vain, may Thy 
divine presence be the sun and the dew 
which will cause me to produce works of 
life and salvation. 



Digitized by 



LOVE FOR THE SACKED HEART. 97 



EIGHTEENTH MEDITATION. 

THE MEANS BY WHICH THE RELIGIOUS SOUL 
BAYISHES THE HEART OF HER BELOVED. 

I. Point. 

Consider that as God has sweetly drawn 
you away from the world, He wishes by 
a humble mutual exchange that you should 
ravish His Sacred Heart with love. What 
method will you adopt? Listen! He 
Himself teaches you: "My sister," He 
says, " thou hast ravished My Heart with 
one of thy eyes, and with one of thy 
hairs." Behold ! by heroic works and great 
virtues you will gain the Heart of this Be- 
loved; you will do so, likewise, by the prac- 
tise of the little and lowjy virtues. 



Digitized by 



98 LOVE FOR THE SACRED HEART. 



II. Point. 

Eeflect that as the human body has only 
two eyes, but an abundance of hair, your 
Spouse displays incomparable mercy in al- 
lowing you to ravish His Heart with a 
single hair. Ah ! at any moment you may 
possess that Divine Heart; for what are 
hairs but the ordinary observances, those 
little ceremonies, those daily virtues which 
we may practise at every turn ? When you 
disregard them, you do not consider that 
you are neglecting to ravish the Heart of 
God. " If you would enter into life/' said 
the meek J esus to His apostles, " keep with 
fidelity all that I have taught you." 

III. Point. 

Eeflect on the value the saints attached 
to the practice of these little virtues. They 
remembered that he who neglects little 
sins shall soon fall into greater. The small 



^Digitized - 



LOVE FOR THE SACRED HEART. 99 

monastic observances are the hedge which 
preserves the religious life, like the vine 
of Our Saviour, from wild beasts, and 
whoever demolishes that hedge shall be bit- 
ten by the infernal serpent Moreover, 
these minute observances are the habit of 
religion, which appears plain and without 
ornament. In short, the holy Founder re- 
marked, that if he were in one of our con- 
vents, he would be so exact in all the little 
practices as thereby to ravish the Heart of 
God. 

Affections. 

O sovereign goodness of the great God,- 
how adorable you are! Did a king ever 
give his vassals access to his cabinet that 
they might take from him his treasures? 
Yet at all times, O God of goodness, Thou 
dost teach me how I may obtain possession 
of Thy Heart and make it my own ! Ah, 



Digitized by 



100 LOVE FOR THE SACRED HEART. 

Lord! if it were only the martyrs that 
could ravish Thy Heart by their eyes and 
their blood, what would we do ? But the 
mortified have the same privilege. If only 
they who convert nations, what would we 
do? Ah ! they who speak humbly and lov- 
ingly of Thee, who inspire others to do 
good, — they have the same reward. If it 
were only conquerors of others, what would 
we do? But self-conquerors have the same 
happiness. Blessed forever be Thy sweet 
goodness! 

O holy and little virtues, which grow 
like flowers at the foot of the cross of my 
Jesus, with holy solicitude I desire to cull 
you, that I may reverently present you to 
my Spouse. O my Jesus, preserve me from 
the reproach that Thou didst make to the 
Pharisees, saying that "they attended to 
small things, and neglected great ones." 
Grant me the grace to do the latter and 



Digitized by 



LOVE FOR THE SACRED HEART. 101 



omit not the former, in imitation of Thee, 
O Lord. Thou didst take little children 
into Thy arms through love and sweetness, 
but Thou didst not fail to carry sinners 
on Thy shoulders through mercy. Grant 
that I may carefully observe the silence 
of obligation, and that through devotion I 
may speak no useless words; that I may 
strictly obey my Superiors through a prin- 
ciple of duty, and willingly condescend to 
my equals through love. 

O religion, most dear Mother, may it 
please God that I never divest myself of 
your holy habit, or break down the hedge 
which preserves you! Mj God, with Thy 
grace, I desire to observe all my obliga- 
tions, but in the end to acknowledge myself 
a useless servant. 



Digitized by 



102 LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOR. 



NINETEENTH MEDITATION. 

THE LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOR. 

I. Point. 

Reflect that Our Saviour, beholding the 
hour of His death approaching, assembled 
His disciples in order to engrave upon their 
hearts His last will and testament. He 
said to them: " This is My commandment, 
that you love one another. By this they 
will know that you are My disciples, if you 
have love for one another." 

II. Point 

Reflect that Our Saviour taught this love 
of our neighbor not only by words, but by 
His own adorable example. "Wishing to die 
for love of all mankind, He gave Himself 



Digitized by 



LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOR. 103 

to us in the Most Blessed Sacrament, nay, 
even to Judas, whom He did not refuse to 
kiss, although He knew him to be His 
enemy. 0 my Saviour ! Thy example con- 
founds me. Alas! rarely am I willing to 
inconvenience myself, or give up my own 
wishes for the love of my neighbor, yet 
Thou teachest me at all times to love him 
in deed and in truth, and not alone in word. 
Thou dost assure me that I shall never enter 
Thy celestial temple, except by one gate, 
that of charity, which opens from two sides 
— the love of God and the love of the 
neighbor. 

III. Point. 

Reflect that Our Lord did not say: " Love 
some of your neighbors." Mo. His com- 
mand comprehends them all. Tou will, 
therefore, bear unworthily the title of Re- 
ligious, if this love is not perfect in you. 



Digitized by 



104 LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOR. 

If you do not feel love and gratitude to- 
ward those that do you good, you are un- 
grateful. If you do not love those that 
despise you, you are proud. If you do not 
love those that afflict you, you are impa- 
tient, etc. By all this you see that with- 
out this holy charity for the neighbor you 
have no virtue. 

Affections. 

Ah, Lord! if your servants are known 
by this holy mark of charity for the neigh- 
bor, I have great reason to fear, I who love 
myself so much, that I can scarcely resolve 
to abandon for even a little while my own 
interests for those of my dear neighbor. On 
all occasions, O heavenly Master, Thou of- 
ferest me Thy love as a model ! My soul, let 
us consider in the presence of God, in what 
manner we should love our neighbors by 
following His example. Sweet Jesus! 



Digitized by 



LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOR. 105 



Thou didst undergo labor to acquire for 
them repose. Thou didst suffer ignominy 
in order to obtain for them glory. Behold, 
0 my soul, what we must endeavor to do. 
0 Lord ! despoil me of self-love, that I may 
be able to imitate Thee ! 

From the bottom of my soul, sweet 
Jesus! I crave a favor of Thee, namely, 
that Thou wouldst grant me the grace al- 
ways to put myself in the place of my 
neighbor, do unto him only that which I 
would wish him to do to me, and do unto 
him all that I would wish him to do to me. 

0 Lord ! if I look with an evil eye upon 
those that displease me, wilt Thou not with- 
draw from me Thy benign countenance? If 

1 speak ill of my neighbor, wilt Thou not 
be silent toward me? Thou wilt speak no 
word to my soul. If I refuse him my serv- 
ices, Thou wilt deny me Thy graces. 

God forbid that I should make excep- 



Digitized by 



106 LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOR. 



tions in my love for my neighbor ! 0 Lord ! 
Thou wilt grant me Thy grace. "Without 
regard to self, I will love Thee in my neigh- 
bor, and never will I love any one but in 
Thee and for Thee. Farewell, private 
friendships, particular affections! What! 
would you distract my soul with a diversity 
of objects, and withdraw my mind from its 
duty and its Rule ? Come into my heart, O 
sweet religious union and holy community 
life, for it is you that the Lord blesses. 



Digitized by 



THE GARDEN OF OLIVES. 107 



TWENTIETH MEDITATION. 

THE GABDEN OF OLIVES. 

I. Point. 

Contemplate the God of majesty enter- 
ing at night the Garden of Olives. He be- 
comes pale, sadness oppresses Him. 
" Ah ! " He exclaims, " My soul is sor- 
rowful even unto death ! " Prostrated in 
prayer, He says to His eternal Father: 
" Father, if it be possible let this chalice 
pass away, yet not My will, but Thine be 
done ! " Three times He repeats the same 
prayer with such anguish and energy that 
a bloody sweat covers Him. 

II. Point. 

What is it that has drawn this sadness of 
death from the Soul of life? Doubtless, 



Digitized by 



108 THE GARDEN OF OLIVES. 



it is love which has loaded Him with the 
sins of men and which wishes for their sake 
to experience the fear and dread of the 
inferior part of the soul. What dost Thou 
say, O my Jesus — that Thy soul is sorrow- 
ful even unto death? Alas! was it not 
Thou who once said to the apostles, that 
Thou hadst a great desire to be baptized 
with the baptism of Thy Passion? Yes, 
those were Thine own words. But, as St. 
Augustine remarks, having been created 
by power and authority, Thou didst wish 
to ransom us in weakness and suffering. 

III. Point. 

Reflect that the eternal Father heard 
His Son for His reverence, says St. Paul; 
and as to the Benjamin of His Heart, He 
sent Him the cup of torments by one of 
His angelic servants. Our sweet Jesus then 
received the chalice so lovingly that He re- 



Digitized by 



THE GARDEN OF OLIVES. 109 



solved to drink it even to the dregs, and to 
allow neither affronts nor confusion nor 
sorrow to overcome Him. To this end, He 
went Himself to meet His enemies. 

Affections. 

O Jesus ! afflicted even unto death, what 
can I say to Thee ? Eve tasted in the garden 
the sweetness of the fruit; but as for Thee, 
my Redeemer, love made Thee taste the 
bitterness of the pain due to her vain pleas- 
ure. Ah, what great secrets are enclosed 
in that garden ! Dear Spouse, when Thou 
wast sorrowful and afflicted, Thou wast far 
away from Thy most intimate friends; but 
when I undergo the slightest annoyance, I 
run to creatures for sympathy. Thou didst 
address Thyself to Thy Father with such 
resignation and perseverance, that Thou 
didst sweat blood; but I cannot watch even 
one hour with Thee. I weary of prayer, 



Digitized by 



110 THE GARDEN OF OLIVES. 



my resignation is only by halves. Hence- 
forth, O Lord, I shall adopt Thy language: 
"Not my will, O Father, but Thine be 
done!" 

O Jesus, love stronger than death loaded 
Thee in the garden with sorrows, with my 
sins, with my infidelities, with my resist- 
ance to Thy graces, and love made Thee 
grieve over my wretchedness! My sweet 
Jesus, if such apprehensions could exist in 
the inferior part of Thy soul whilst con- 
templating death, what should I think, 
criminal that I am, on beholding Thee, O 
King of innocence ? Ah, I should be con- 
vinced that Thy death acquired life for 
Thy children, as Thy weakness obtained 
strength for them. 

O creatures! prevent not my drinking 
the chalice of afflictions that my heavenly 
Father sends me, for I desire to render 
myself conformable to Jesus suffering! 



Digitized by 



THE GARDEN OF OLIVES. Ill 



Take, O humble Jesus, take this chalice 
that the Father sends Thee. Ah, my soul ! 
what is it that the Father sends to His Son ? 
Consolation ? No, rather an increase of tor- 
ments. Was it not His consolation to do in 
all things the will of His Father ? This it 
was that strengthened Him, so that instead 
of retarding Him, He goes forward to meet 
His sufferings. O creatures ! whoever you 
may be, do not prevent me from accepting 
the chalice that my Father offers me* 



Digitized by 



112 THE LOVE OF OUR SAVIOUR. 



TWENTY-FIRST MEDITATION. 

THE LOVE OF OUR SAVIOUR IN THE MIDST OF 
HIS LABORS. 

J. Point. 

Reflect that the eternal Father so loved 
the world that He gave to it His only Son; 
and the Son so loved the will of His Father 
that, knowing He wished to save human 
nature, and considering not the abjection 
and misery thereby entailed, He volunta- 
rily offered an enormous price for its ran- 
som; namely, His own blood, His sweat, 
and His life. 

II. Point 

Our Saviour, urged by His love, bows 
to the will of His Father, and offers Him- 



THE LOVE OF OUR SAVIOUR. 113 

self for the redemption of the world. In 
each mystery of His Passion, He exclaims: 
" O My Father ! human nature would be 
sufficiently redeemed by one of My tears; 
but that would not suffice for the rever- 
ence I bear Thy holy will, that would not 
satisfy My love. I long to undergo My 
agony in the garden, I long to be struck, to 
be crowned with thorns, to be reduced to 
so pitiable a state as to become like unto a 
leper without shape or comeliness." 

III. Point. 

Our meek Jesus was scourged, crowned 
with thorns, condemned, mocked, and ig- 
nored, because He was destined and con- 
secrated to bear opprobrium and ignominy 
as punishments consequent on our sins. 
He became a holocaust for sin, being, as 
it were, accursed, exiled from His eternal 
Father, and abandoned by Him. 



Digitized by 



114 THE LOVE OF OUR SAVIOUR. 



'Affections. 

My soul, dwell for the future amid the 
thorns and the scourges of the Saviour. 
There, like a nightingale, humbly sigh: 
live Jesus, who wishes to die that my soul 
may live ! O eternal Father, what return 
can the world maketoTheeforthegiftThou 
hast bestowed upon it in Thy only-begot- 
ten Son ? To redeem man, a thing as vile as 
I am, He delivered Himself; and, ingrate 
that I am, I play the miser, giving not 
even my nothingness to Him who has given 
me His all ! 

Ah ! if I am the spouse of J esus crucified 
and suffering, I must throughout my whole 
life consider it an immense favor to clothe 
myself with His livery; namely, the nails, 
the thorns, and the lance. Remember, my 
soul, that the feast of His nuptials is gall 
And vinegar. O King of glory ! it is too 



Digitized by 



THE LOVE OF OUR SAVIOUR. 115 



great an honor to drink with Thee the chal- 
ice of suffering. Never let it happen that 
I refuse this beverage; for, as David says: 
" It is, 0 God, the drink of Thy well-be- 
loved." 

O Religious, who have undertaken to 
follow Jesus crucified, know that you 
should be stripped of your own affections, 
as He was of His sacred garment. O my 
God ! I deceive myself if I wish to gather 
the myrrh of Thy mortifications with one 
hand and the miserable gratifications of 
the earth with the other. Guard me from 
this misfortune, my beloved Jesus > and 
make me walk with Thee to glory by the 
road of sorrow. 



Digitized by 



116 OUR SAVIOUR ON THE CROSS. 



TWENTY-SECOND MEDITATION. 

OUB SAVIOUB ON THE OBOSS. 

I. Point. 

Ebflect upon what St. Augustine says, 
that " Isaac was immolated by his father's 
will where Jesus was afterward crucified, 
and that the cross of the Saviour was 
planted on the sepulchre of Adam." It was 
most appropriate that the Physician should 
be raised up from the couch of the sick 
man, and that the divine mercy should de- 
scend upon the place where pride fell. In 
order, therefore, that our blessed Saviour 
should shed His blood upon the ashes of 
the first transgressor, and that the soul 
which was, at the Last Day, to animate 
those same ashes might be cleansed of sin, 
the cross upon which Jesus was nailed was 
planted on the tomb of Adam. 



Digitized by 



OUR SAVIOUR ON THE CROSS. 117 



II. Point. 

Contemplate the divine Saviour ex- 
tended and elevated on this cross, as on a 
funeral pile of honor. Ah! it was then 
that, as a great bishop, He offered the 
perfect sacrifice to His Father; it was then 
that He turned thoughts of special love 
upon us. " O My eternal Father ! I take 
upon Myself all the sins of this, My daugh- 
ter. I load Myself with them in order 
to suffer death, that she may be forgiven, 
I die, that she may live. I long to be 
crucified, that she may be glorified." O 
sovereign love of the Heart of Jesus! 
what heart is capable of devoutly blessing 
Thee? 

III. Point. 

Behold, whilst the Jews with hearts of 
iron and stone surround the cross, our meek 



Digitized by 



118 OUR SAVIOUR ON THE CROSS. 



Jesus, on the contrary, as David says, " has 
a Heart liquefied with love in the midst of 
His breast." And like that admirable bird 
which attracts to itself the jaundice of man, 
and dies in order to heal him, this wonder- 
ful Bird of paradise, our sweet Jesus, who 
was never stained with the jaundice of sin, 
is fastened to the cross to draw into Him- 
self the poison from man, His beloved 
friend. He gladly dies in order to give 
life to our poor human nature. 

Affections. 

" O God ! " I repeat with St. Augustine, 
lamenting the ingratitude of men, "is it 
possible that man knows that Thou didst die 
for him, and yet he does not live for 
Thee?" And with St. Francis: "Alas, O 
Jesus ! my sweet Jesus ! Thou didst die of 
love, and no one thinks of it ! " My sweet 
Redeemer, never was the misery of Adam 



Digitized by 



OUR SAVIOUR ON THE CROSS. 119 



so poisonous to us, as Thy clemency is pow- 
erful to save us. O obedient J esus ! obedi- 
ent even unto the death of the cross, be 
Thou the Eepairer of all my acts of diso- 
bedience! May Thy precious blood sink 
into the deepest wounds of my soul, for it 
is the medicine of my salvation ! 

O free will of my heart ! how desirable 
to be fastened to the cross of our divine 
Saviour in order to die to self, to offer 
self as a holocaust to the Lord ! Never for- 
get, O my soul, that your Congregation is 
spiritually founded on Mount Calvary for 
the service of this crucified Lover, in imita- 
tion of whom we must crucify the senses, 
imagination, aversions, passions, and hu- 
mors for the love of the heavenly Father. 

O innocent Jesus, who didst die for my 
iniquity, grant that I may no longer live 
but for Thy goodness ! Like the mystical 
serpent, love has elevated Thee on high! 



Digitized by 



120 OUR SAVIOUR ON THE CROSS. 

If I do not look upon Thee, my sweet 
Physician, I shall not deserve to be cured. 
Therefore, O Lord 1 may my eyes be con- 
stantly fixed on Thy sufferings, and my 
heart riveted to Thy goodness ! Jesus, by 
Thy pierced hands, pardon my evil deeds ! 
By Thy pierced feet, grant me forgiveness 
of my transgressions ! 



Digitized by 



OUR SAVIOUR'S FIRST WORDS. 121 



TWENTY-THIRD MEDITATION*. 

THE FIRST FIVE WORDS THAT OUR SAVIOUR 
SPOKE ON THE CROSS. 

J. Point 

Eeflect that our meek Jesus, on behold- 
ing His enemies around Him, exclaimed: 
"Father, forgive them, for they know 
not what they do ! " O what perfect char- 
ity ! Our Saviour not being able to justify 
the sin of His wicked executioners, casts 
about for the most plausible excuse for 
them, namely, ignorance. Moreover, it 
was on this holy cross, with a heart so full 
of love for men, that Jesus, to the thief 
who merely asked Him to remember him, 
gave a solemn promise of paradise. Oh, 
what a fearful thing is the fall of those 



Digitized by 



122 OUR SAVIOURS FIRST WORDS. 



that are called to a high vocation ! Judas, 
the apostle^ was lost through pride; the 
thief humbles himself, and he is saved. 

II. Point., 

Behold St. John and the most blessed 
Virgin at the foot of the cross, at the feet 
of their Beloved, who, seeing His Mother 
overwhelmed with grief, said to her: 
" Woman, behold your son ! " namely, 
John; and to John: "Behold your 
Mother ! " O admirable Mother ! was it not 
fitting that your heart should be thoroughly 
accustomed to the language of love, and 
should comprehend its meaning? You un- 
derstood that He gave you as a Mother to 
His spouse the Church, to which He gave 
birth on the cross, says St. Augustine. O 
incomparable thought! As soon as Jesus 
had pronounced this third word, the sun, 
as if touched with lively sorrow, withdrew 



Digitized by 



OUR SAVIOUR'S FIRST WORDS 123 

his light, and darkness spread over the 
whole earth. 

III. Point. 

Hark ! After three hours of silence, our 
sweet Saviour cries out: "My God, My 
God, why hast Thou forsaken Me? " The 
inferior part of His soul was so abandoned, 
so crushed with sorrow, so beset with woe, 
that, in order to console us in our weak- 
nesses, He complained to His Father; but 
to prove that the superior part longed for 
these sufferings, He exclaimed: " I thirst." 
He alluded not to corporal thirst. Let us 
believe, my soul, that He had a burning 
thirst, burning for the salvation of those 
that thirsted so ardently for His ruin. O 
poor people ! You ask Jesus to come down 
from the cross; but He takes care not to 
do so. He thirsts too ardently for your sal- 



Digitized by 



r 



124 OUR SAVIOUR'S FIRST WORDS. 

vation, which He must obtain by His death 
on it. 

Affections. 

O kind Saviour, what tenderness of heart 
Thou dost teach me for my neighbor — that 
I should even excuse those who crucified 
my Spouse ! Ah ! I will say with the Apos- 
tle: " If they had known Him, they would 
not have crucified the God of glory." But 
beware, my soul, lest the disorderly passions 
that closed their eyes blind your own. O 
my Saviour, Thou dost excuse Thy execu- 
tioners, even in the act of sinning, and 
scarcely can we forget a contradiction long 
after receiving it, scarcely can we look 
kindly upon those who have ever so slightly 
displeased us. 

O holy and most devoted Mother! re- 
ceive John as your son, that is to say, re- 
ceive the children of the Church as your 
children, and we shall henceforth be per- 



Digrtrzed by 



OUR SAVIOUR'S FIRST WORDS. 125 



mitted to call you Mother. O J esus ! Thou 
didst will to die naked and despoiled of all 
things, even to the giving of Thine own 
dear Mother to us, 

O sweet Saviour ! it was by no means to 
offend against holy indifference, that Thou 
didst utter a complaint to Thy Father. It 
was to console us in our trials, and make us 
realize the actual sorrow and anguish of 
Thy blessed soul, for not the sorrows of 
death alone, but also the thirst of love con- 
sumed Thee, and made Thee long ardently 
for our salvation. Ah ! am I not an ingrate, 
if I complain in my little trials, since I be- 
hold the only Son of God thirsting to un- 
dergo suffering for me ? If such a Father 
abandons the inferior part of the soul of 
such a Son, why not the soul of a mis- 
erable slave? 



_ DigitizecLby LjQOQI€ 



126 OUR LADY AT THE CROSS. 



TWENTY-FOURTH MEDITATION. 

THE BLESSED VIRGIN STANDING AT THE FOOT 
OF THE CROSS. 

J. Point 

Consider the most blessed Virgin, in all 
constancy standing at the foot of the cross 
of her Son. Ah! what do you seek, O 
Mother of Life, in this place of Calvary and 
of death ? Truly, not for joy, but for your 
dear Son. With your whole maternal heart 
you desire to be united to Him; therefore, 
do I behold you in this place of Calyary, 
bound and exposed with your divine Son. 

II. Point. 

Love attracted all the pains> torments, 
wounds, the whole Passion of Our Ke- 



Digitized by 



OUR LADY AT THE CROSS. 127 



deemer into the heart of His most blessed 
Mother. The same nails that crucified the 
body of the divine Son crucified the heart 
of the Mother. The thorns of His crown 
pierced her soul so that she could truly ex- 
claim: " My Beloved is a bouquet of myrrh 
to me, but so loved that He remains between 
my breasts, that is, in my breast, in the 
centre of my heart." 

III. Point. 

Contemplate the most blessed Virgin as 
a mystical bee, extracting honey from the 
wounds of the Lion of the tribe of Juda, 
immolated, torn to pieces, and lacerated on 
the cross. " O Child of the cross," said she, 
"let us glory in Thy admirable mission 
which the world does not comprehend. O 
all you who pass through this world, be- 
hold how amiable is the death of my Son, 
since it is the sovereign outcome of His 



Digitized by 



128 OUR LADY AT THE CROSS. 



love. Ah! my Jesus must die that the 
human race may not perish." 

Affections. 

Tour holy Abbess, O religious souls, is 
not on the mountain of Thabor, but on the 
hill of Calvary, where she beholds only op- 
probrium, impotence, the lance, the nails, 
and darkness. O Mother of devoted love, 
the waves of affliction cannot extinguish 
your charity, though one tiny drop of 
trouble and contradiction causes me to take 
refuge behind my suffering and beloved 
Jesus. 

Most blessed Virgin, as you were a vessel 
of election, the greatest, the most capable, 
the most worthy in the world, you were 
also, more than any other, filled with bit- 
terness, with the beverage of anguish which 
your Beloved drank in this place of tor- 



Digitized by 



OUR LADY AT THE CROSS. 129 



ments. Ah! what does this teach me, if 
not to receive tribulations as something that 
I share with our Spouse? O Mother most 
pure, you call to us, saying: " Come, my 
daughters, let your hearts be like empty 
vessels, and my Son will pour into them 
the dew with which His forehead is cov- 
ered, and the drops of the night of His 
Passion with which His head is adorned. 
He will turn them for you into pearls of 
consolation." My sweet Mother! obtain 
for me the grace henceforth to receive all 
occasions of humiliation, of suffering, and 
of abjection, as tiny drops of blood trick- 
ling from that precious head. 

O mystical Bee, grant me the grace that, 
in the hive of my cloister and in the small 
apartment of my heart, I may, in imita- 
tion of you, make practical use of the 
honey gathered from the sacred wounds of 
Our Saviour. Depart from me, earthly 



Digitized by 



130 OUR LADY AT THE CROSS. 



cravings ! The gall of my King is sweeter 
to me than the honeycomb. O Mother of 
sorrows and fountain of love, never per- 
mit me to withdraw from the hallowed foot 
of the adorable cross. 



Digitized by Google 



THE DEATH OF OUR SAVIOUR. 131 



TWENTY-FIFTH MEDITATION. 

THE DEATH OF OTJB SAVIOUB ON THE CBOSS. 

I. Point* 

Keflect that it was on the cross that the 
eternal Son gave the kiss of love to His 
heavenly Father in favor of mankind. It 
was then and there that the Father per- 
ceived a sweet odor coming from the gar- 
ments of His Son, that is to say, from His 
holy humanity. " Ah ! " He exclaimed, 
" the odor of My Son resembles that of a 
field blooming and plentiful." Yes; for 
Jesus, Flower of the fields, having been 
crushed beneath the press of the cross, gave 
forth a perfume which rejoiced God, rav- 
ished the angels, and redeemed mankind. 



Digitized by 



132 THE DEATH OF OUR SAVIOUR. 



II. Point 

Our Saviour cried out: " All is consum- 
mated/' the redemption of the world is ac- 
complished. My Father, I remit My spirit 
into Thy hands. I have already given 
Thee My body, My sweat, My blood; noth- 
ing now remains but the soul that animates 
this mutilated body. O My Father, I remit 
it into Thy hands, do with it as it shall 
please Thee. Grant only that Thy will be 
accomplished, whether Thou desirest My 
soul still to remain in this body, or that I 
should breathe it out into Thy hands. 

III. Point 

Eeflect that our meek J esus sees that His 
Father desires His departure. Death not 
being able to enter into Him who holds the 
keys of life and death, love opened the door 
to death, so that it might destroy His pre- 
cious body. And Jesus, bowing His head 



Digitized by 



THE DEATH OF OUR SAVIOUR. 133 



in order to give the kiss of peace to His 
blessed Mother and to His nascent Church, 
expired through His own election of love. 
Then, O God, sepulchres were opened, the 
earth trembled, and the veil of the Temple 
was rent in twain; all things rendered hom- 
age to the Conqueror of death. 

Affections. 

O Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, 
how precious is the sacred blood that flows 
from Thy most pure body ! Thou art alone, 
no one assists Thee to turn the heavy wine- 
press, nevertheless Thy sacred body, the 
divine garment of Thy soul, is crimson with 
its own blood, because Thou art in the day 
of Thy vintage. O eternal Father, behold 
the face of Thy Christ, and have pity 
on His brethren ! Sweet Jesus, mutilated, 
trodden upon, lacerated in all Thy mem- 
bers, what confusion for me not to wish 



Digitized by 



134 THE DEATH OF OUR SAVIOUR. 

that I may be torn to pieces by mortifica- 
tion ! Nevertheless, it is only by that means 
that I shall give forth the sweet liquor of 
virtue. O religious souls, be ashamed to 
call yourselves members of Jesus Christ, 
if you are not willing to suffer with Jesus 
Christ; for it is too great an indignity to see 
delicate and sensual members under a head 
crowned with thorns. 

0 dear Jesus, I know that torments 
grievous enough to cause the death of an 
entire world were Thine, nevertheless they 
were insufficient to make Thee die. It was 
expedient that Thou shouldst Thyself remit 
Thy soul into the hands of Thy Father, all 
things having been fulfilled. From this I 
learn the quintessence of the spiritual life, 
namely, perfect abandonment into the 
hands of the heavenly Father. Ah, may 
I often pronounce these blessed words: 
" Father, I remit my spirit into Thy hands. 



Digitized by 



THE DEATH OF OUR SAVIOUR. 135 

Do unto me this or that according to Thy 
will ! My Superiors, I have accomplished 
your commands, laborious and abject 
though they be. I abandon myself into 
your hands that, if it so please you, I may 
begin anew." Happy shall I be if I live in 
this manner ! 

Incline Thy head, O my divine King, 
and call upon death to give me lif e. O 
why is death feared? My Jesus has en- 
dured it ! Ah, Jesus, God of life, grant me 
the grace at the hour of my death to remit 
my soul into Thy hands, for Thou art my 
true Father! Wither away with love and 
sorrow, O my soul, on beholding Jesus 
dead for your sins. Depart not from the 
holy mount of Calvary, until you have en- 
tombed the beloved Spouse in your heart. 



Digitized by 



136 HAPPINESS IN THE CROSS. 



TWENTY-SIXTH MEDITATION. 

THE JOY AND HAPPINESS THAT THE DEVOUT 
SOUL EXPERIENCES IN THE CEOSS. 

I. Point. 

Striking my breast at the foot of the 
cross of my sweet Jesus, I will exclaim, 
" Here is truly the Son of God ! " Never 
may I glory in myself, nor in the world, 
nor in anything whatever. Let Jonas re- 
joice under the shadow of his ivy, let Abra- 
ham prepare beneath, the tree a feast for 
the angels, let Ismael cry under the tree of 
the desert, let Elias be fed in solitude be- 
neath the juniper-tree; as for us, we wish 
for no other joy than that of the cross, no 
other drink than the blood which flows 
therefrom, no other nourishment than the 
fruit of life suspended on it 



Digitized by 



HAPPINESS IN THE GROSS. 137 



II. Point. 

Consider how venerable is this cross. 
" Ah ! " exclaimed David, " adore the foot- 
prints of God." And what shall we say of 
the cross that has been the bed, the seat> the 
throne, of that same God? Jacob adored 
the rod of J oseph, and Esther kissed the rod 
of her husband Assuerus. Oh ! then, with 
what reverence should the devout soul kiss 
the cross, the true royal sceptre of her dear 
Jesus! She should say with David: "O 
all you preach, and say that the Lord reigns 
by the wood." 

III. Point. 

Consider how exceedingly the dearest 
friends of God have loved the cross. The 
most blessed Virgin, sacred Sulamitess, 
ascended this palm at every moment in or- 
3eir to cull its fruits; St. Peter had no other 



Digitized by 



138 HAPPINESS IN THE CROSS. 

strength, St. Paul no other glory, St. John 
no other refuge, St. Andrew no other 
sweetness; and as to our Father, St Francis 
de Sales, he protested that, if he knew that 
a single fibre of his heart was not stamped 
with the cross, he would pluck it out. 

Affections. 

0 most holy cross, honored by the sacred 
members of my Saviour, you are the royal 
gate that conducts to the temple of holi- 
ness, outside of which we shall never find 
it O religious souls! contemplate pro- 
foundly the wounds that Our Lord suffered 
on the cross, and learn that vain and fool- 
ish is the heart that perches on any other 
tree. I salute you, O holy cross, standard 
of salvation, palm of life, sword by which 
the devil was annihilated, medicine of im- 
mortality, protector of the present life, 
pledge of life eternal, sacred sign of Chris- 



Digitizechby 



HAPPINESS IN THE CROSS. 139 



tians, trophy of our King, J esus ! 0 dear 
and desirable cross ! receive me within your 
venerable arms. 

0 Jesus, my Spouse! in kissing and em- 
bracing Thy own cross, Thou didst embrace 
all our little crosses, thus to render them 
more amiable. O little crosses, little trials, 
little repugnances, humiliations, trifling 
though you be, my Jesus has seen, has 
kissed, has sanctified you. Why, then, 
throughout the journey of this life, should 
I not have recourse to Thy transpierced 
Heart ? At every step we meet with crosses. 
If my flesh trembles at the sight of them, 
my heart loves them. Yes, I love you, 
little and great crosses, interior and exte- 
rior, corporal and spiritual, though I am 
unworthy of the honor of your shadow. 

"Whence, alas ! comes the misfortune that 
reverence for the cross has grown so cold ? 
The primitive Christians and lovers of 



i i 



Digitized by 



UO BAPPWESS IN THE CROSS. 

Jesus always made this sign of life 
with, great veneration, when eating and 
drinking, standing and sitting. "When 
thou goest out, when thou dost enter the 
house, when thou bringest a light, cover 
thyself with the sacred sign of the cross, 
and evils dare not approach thee," says an 
ancient writer. O holy Lover of the cross, 
grant that, following Thy example, I may 
love the crucifixion of the body and of the 
heart! O holy cross! be to me a most 
amiable chain, and a rampart upon my 
breast 1 



Digitized by 



RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD. 141 



TWENTY-SEVENTH MEDITATION. 

THE RESURRECTION OF OUB LORD. 

I. Point. 

Reflect that, after a deluge of torments, 
of sadness, and of sorrow had been in- 
flicted on Our Saviour, He arose from the 
tomb by His own power, and early in the 
morning, beauteous, resplendent, subtile, 
agile, and all-glorious, He went to visit His 
most blessed Mother. Rejoice, O holy 
Mother ! Behold your dear Jesus more tri- 
umphant than ever. Behold the temple 
that the Jews had demolished, raised up 
again. Behold, the sign of J onas has come. 
Behold your dear Joseph alive. 

II. Point 

Reflect that joy was immense in the Ark 



Digitized by 



142 RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD. 



of Noe when the dove returned, bearing 
an olive branch as a sign that the flood 
had ceased and that God had bestowed the 
blessing of peace. But, O God ! with what 
delight was not the band of apostles rav- 
ished, when they saw the sacred humanity 
of the Saviour, resuscitated and glorious, 
returning to them, bearing in His mouth 
the olive branch of holy and acceptable 
peace ! " Pax vohis" He said. This is the 
indubitable sign of the cessation of the wa- 
ters of the Father's anger; here is the sign 
of reconciliation of man with God. 

III. Point 

Consider how necessary it was that the 
benign Saviour should visit His disciples. 
Their faith, their hope, and their charity 
were wavering. It was Magdalen who had 
gone forth to embalm Him. The disciples of 
Emmaus said: " We had hoped; " and the 



Digitized V^OOQle 



RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD. 143 



rest of them looked upon the words of the 
holy women as dreams. Behold why Our 
Saviour, fearing their peril, like a good 
Master, came to strengthen them. "Iam 
indeed Myself, beloved disciples. See My 
hands, My feet, and the wound of My side." 

[Affections. 

0 blessed and faithful Virgin, how sweet 
to your maternal heart was this joyful 
news: "Your Son is alive!" 0 holy 
daughters of Sion ! dry your tears, behold, 
your Beloved has come! Since you have 
drunk the cup of His sorrows, as His Ben- 
jamin, He will give you the first and the 
greatest share in the joy of His glory. My 
soul, reverence in silence the triumphant 
Bon of our comforted Mother. 

0 sweet Jesus! if my interior was well 
ordered and prepared for Thy coming, Thou 
wouldst address to me the consoling words: 



Digitized by 



1U RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD. 



" Peace be to you ! 99 Alas, my heart ! if 
we had once received the peace of Jesus, 
the world could no longer disturb us. Holy 
peace, sung by the angels at the birth of 
the Saviour, and bequeathed by Him at His 
Resurrection, be forever in my heart ! Now 
I firmly believe that my Redeemer liveth, 
and that at the Last Day I shall rise again. 

From this thought I make the deter- 
mined resolution never to profane my 
body. As I shall not flatter it, since it 
must perish, I shall also guard it as destined 
to rise again in glory. For as my eyes shall 
eternally behold Our Saviour, I shall with- 
draw them from vain and useless objects. 
As I shall receive the kiss of the glorious 
Spouse, I shall not allow indecent, irrelig- 
ious, quarrelsome words, or words of mur- 
muring and excuse to pass my lips. I shall 
observe similar circumspection with regard 
to my other senses. 



Digitized by 



RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD. 145 



Come, O my Beloved, strengthen my 
faith, for confiding in Thy power honors 
Thy Father; my hope, because it is estab- 
lished on Thy redemption; my charity, 
since it embraces the goodness of the Holy 
Ghost. O dear Lover, what wilt Thou ask 
while showing Thy wounds, if not, " Have 
you need of strength? Behold My hands. 
Do you want heart? Here is My Sacred 
Heart Are you a dove ? Here is the cleft 
of the corner-stone, come, repose therein." 
Lord, I have need of all this, and still more. 
I am sick and a prisoner, but I go to Thee, 
and there I find my medicine and my sal- 
vation. 



Digitized by 



146 ASCENSION OF OUR LORD. 



TWENTY-EIGHTH MEDITATION. 

THE ASCENSION OF OUB LORD, 

I. Point 

Reflect that the Blessed Virgin, on the 
day of the Ascension of her Son, could not, 
indeed, apply to Him this passage of the 
canticle of love: "Flee away, my Be- 
loved, to the eternal hills, filled with an 
eternal sweetness; " but " Be Thou like a 
roe that turns frequently to see those that 
it leaves behind." 

II. Point. 

Behold the holy band assembled on the 
mountain of Olives. Our glorious Re- 
deemer blesses them all; then, in the char- 
iot of His power and omnipotence, He as- 



Digitized by 



ASCENSION OF OUR LORD. 147 

cends triumphantly into heaven. " 0," ex- 
claimed the Blessed Virgin, " behold how 
beautiful is my Beloved ! How holy is the 
cross which He carries as a trophy of vic- 
tory! It is of incorruptible wood." The 
Lord has crowned our Conqueror with the 
glory of His Resurrection and Ascension; 
this thought should ravish the whole world 
with His praise. 

III. Point. 

As this generous assembly kept their 
eyes riveted on our sweet Jesus who as- 
cended on high, a cloud hid Him from 
their gaze; nevertheless, they did not cease 
to look after Him, until the angels, the 
servants of our King, said to them: " Why 
stand ye here looking up to heaven ? This 
Jesus whom ye have seen taken up to 
heaven will come again to judge the living 
and the dead." Then the holy company re- 



Digitized by 



148 ASCENSION OF OUR LORD. 



turned to Jerusalem, whilst the victorious 
Prince, who led captivity captive, was 
seated at the right hand of the Father, plac- 
ing His faithful servants on the thrones that 
Lucifer and the rebel angels had forfeited. 
O God, what a favor to mankind, what hap- 
piness to the angels, what jubilation in the 
heavenly Jerusalem! 

Affections. 

O most blessed Virgin ! who dost invite 
your Beloved to ascend on high, would that 
we were despoiled of all self-interest ! The 
other daughters of Sion call Him with a 
loud voice, and beg Him not to leave them; 
but you, O chaste Dove ! you seek the glory 
of your Son, and in this consist your joy 
and felicity. Yes, O my Lord, go to the 
eternal hills, but cast Thy holy and merci- 
ful looks upon us at every instant. 

"Alas, O Lord!" says St. Augustine, 



Digitized 



ASCENSION OF OUR LORD. 149 

" haw deeply do I grieve at not being pres- 
ent on the mount of Olives to kiss the holes 
made by the nails, and to bathe with sweet- 
est tears of joy the wounds of Thy precious 
body ! " O my Jesus ! I was absent and far 
away when Thou didst ascend into para- 
dise. "With hands raised to heaven, Thou 
didst bless Thy disciples* and I was not 
there; the angels consoled them, and I 
heard no word of comfort. What shall I do 
now ? "Where shall I seek Thee ? No, there 
is no more joy in my heart; my soul refuses 
all consolation, except from Thee. O unut- 
terable sweetness! May my conversation 
be in heaven, where my Jesus reigns in His 
glory! 

O angels of peace ! blame me not if I al- 
ways look on high; for where my Jesus is, 
there is my treasure. By sanding His disci- 
ples into Jerusalem, where they had orders 
to expect the Paraclete, you teach me at all 



Digitized by 



150 ASCENSION OF OUR LORD. 



times to perform promptly what my Be- 
loved ordains. O holy company delivered 
from Limbo, whom Jesus establishes in His 
glory, remember, like Elias, to let your 
mantle fall on your servant. Drop upon 
my poor soul the mantle of faith and the 
veil of hope, you who need only the pre- 
cious robe of charity. 



Digitized by 



DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST. 151 



TWENTY-NINTH MEDITATION. 

THE DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST. 

J. Point 

Chosen souls, enter humbly into the 
cenacle, where the glorious Virgin, the 
holy apostles, the faithful disciples, and 
the devout women are assembled in prayer, 
in recollection, in faith, in hope, expecting 
their good Master to fulfil His promise, 
and that you all may be clothed with virtue 
from on high. Turn away from distrac- 
tions, in order to receive this perfect gift 
from the Father of lights, for God will 
never pour upon you His mercies if He 
does not find you interiorly recollected and 
separated from the world. Do you not see 
that this happy company, though in Jem- 



Digitized by 



152 DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST. 



salem, remains retired, as it were, in a 
desert? 

II. Point. 

Ten days after Our Saviour had ascended 
on high, and after His beloved had been 
prepared by silence, fraternity, and prayer, 
suddenly there came a sound from heaven, 
as of a mighty wind. It filled the whole 
house in which they were assembled, and 
there appeared to them tongues, as it were 
of fire, that sat upon every one of them. 
Oh ! even in our own day, God imparts His 
gifts. We have only to desire them in or- 
der to receive them. 

III. Point. 

Reflect how greatly the eternal Father 
loves the holy Church, since He has en- 
riched it with His own treasures. Not sat- 
isfied with giving it His Son and His image, 



Digitized by 



DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST 153 



He still further bestows upon it His Holy 
Spirit, so that, as the Holy Ghost over- 
shadowed the Virgin, of whose pure blood 
Jesus was to be born, in order to become 
the Father of the Church, so in like manner 
does the Holy Spirit descend to embrace 
it, lately sprung from the blood of the 
Saviour. 



Affections. 

Oh ! who will give me the grace to main- 
tain interior peace, far from the distractions 
of the world, so that I may in silence ex- 
pect the coming of the Holy Ghost? O 
blessed Virgin ! O glorious apostles ! ob- 
tain for me your devotion, that I may per- 
severe in prayer in order that, should Our 
Lord delay to come, I may await in pa- 
tience. I know, O my God ! that Thou wilt 
not leave me an orphan, but if I continue 



Digitized by 



154 DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST. 



to obey Thee, Thou wilt send me Thy 
Spirit of truth. 

Come, Holy Spirit, fill our hearts with 
the fire of Thy charity. Come, Father of 
the poor, come, Giver of gifts, Light of 
hearts ! O sweet J esus, wishing to promul- 
gate Thy law, Thou didst cast upon Thy 
disciples tongues of fire, showing clearly 
thereby that evangelical preaching is wholly 
destined for the inflaming of hearts with 
heavenly love. O Holy Spirit, who didst 
bring fire upon earth, what dost Thou wish 
except that it may burn ? Once more I con- 
jure Thee to fill my heart with the fire of 
Thy charity, of that charity, I repeat, which 
endures all things, which believes all 
things, and which is not envious. 

O holy Church of the living God, how 
rich you are*! The blessed laborers in your 
vineyard are filled with the Holy Spirit. 
He transforms them into fire, love, and zeal* 



Digitized by 



DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST. 155 



They are vessels full of the wine of the 
Spouse, and so disgusted with terrestrial 
things, that they consider themselves happy 
to live ever after in anguish, in persecu- 
tion, and in a state of death for their dear 
Jesus. O Holy Spirit! if I receive Thee 
without resistance, doubtless Thou wilt pro- 
duce within me great effects. I shall speak 
only of the marvels of God; I shall seek but 
His glory and my own abasement; I shall 
esteem myself favored to suffer opprobrium 
for the name of the Lord, 



Digitized by 



156 THE PRESENCE OF GOD. 



THIRTIETH MEDITATION. 

THE PRESENCE OF GOD. 

J. Point 

Reflect that heaven and earth are full 
of the majesty of God, who is in all things 
and everywhere, by His essence, His pres- 
ence, and His power. O how can we forget 
a truth so infallible and so encouraging? 
" Oh ! " exclaimed Moses to animate his 
people, " there is no nation that has its gods 
so near it as we have, for our God is always 
with us. His eyes see us continually, His 
ears are lovingly inclined to hear us in all 
places." 

II. Point. 

Reflect that attention to the divine pres- 
ence is an efficacious means to arrive at 



Digitized by 



THE PRESENCE OF GOD. 157 



perfection. It was one of the first precepts 
that God gave to His servant Abraham: 
" Walk before Me, and be perfect." 0 
Lord, what else didst Thou say to me in 
placing me in this holy convent, except, 
"My daughter, walk always in My pres- 
ence, and you will attain perfection ! Think 
on Me in all your ways, and I will conduct 
your steps." 

III. Point 
Reflect into what an abuse and misfor- 
tune the soul falls that is forgetful of this 
divine presence! The two old men of 
Babylon 'turned their eyes away from 
heaven, in order not to remember their 
sins. "You are mad," says David, "if 
you say: ' The God of Jacob does not see 
me, the God of Israel watches not/ For 
His eyes behold all upon the face of the 
earth. He sees and contemplates all that 
is done upon it; He sounds hearts, He fore- 



Digitized by 



158 THE PRESENCE OF GOD. 



sees thoughts; nothing escapes Him, His 
eye observes all things." 

Affections. 
O sweet Jesus, my Saviour and my God ! 
assuredly I know that if I ascend up to 
heaven, Thou art there; if I descend into 
hell, there I find Thee; if my spirit flies to 
the extremity of the seas, and descends into 
the abysses, there I meet Thee. Therefore, 
why shall I not serve Thee everywhere? 
Why shall I not pray to Thee in all places, 
since in all places, my Beloved, Thou dost 
listen to me? O sovereign King! how 
happy are they who belong entirely to 
Thee ! Thou dost give them audience at all 
hours. "Who will obtain for me the grace 
that in all things and everywhere I may 
forget myself by the constant remembrance 
of Thee, who art more present to me than 
I am to myself. The further I withdraw 
from myself, the nearer I approach to Thee. 



Digitized by 



THE PRESENCE OF GOD. 159 



Wherefore, alas! is this disorder? I am 
called to walk before the Lord and to be 
perfect; but, on the contrary, I walk after 
my own appetites, my self-will, and my 
self-love; thus do I annihilate all perfec- 
tion. O my soul! henceforth in all your 
actions you should look up to Him who sits 
at the right hand of the Father, invisible 
to our senses, but present to the heart, in 
which He desires to reign as He does in 
heaven. 

O foolish and ungrateful spouse! dare 
you hereafter voluntarily turn away from 
your Beloved, in order to occupy yourself 
with the miserable amusements of earth? 
Ah ! it is in His presence, it is before His 
eyes, that you are wanting in fidelity; noth- 
ing is concealed from the great Spectator 
who dwells on high. O God, searcher of 
hearts, may all my thoughts and my de- 
sires be directed to Thee I 



Digitized by 



160 THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD. 



THIRTY-FIRST MEDITATION. 

THE PBOVIDENOE OF GOD. 

I. Point 

Reflect that God's love for us is so great 
that He employs His wisdom, His power, 
and His goodness to conduct us to our end 
by means most suitable and effectual. Not 
only does His providence watch over the 
most important things of our salvation, but 
even over the most trifling events of our 
life. A hair of our head does not fall 
without His providence, and He knows 
even the number of them. "Without His 
permission, neither men nor demons dare 
touch one of them. 

II. Point. 

Reflect that Divine Providence does all 



Digitized by 



THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD. 161 



for us with weight, number, and measure, 
says the Holy Scripture. Behold, then, the 
obligation we are under of leaving to Him 
the care of ourselves ! Let us not consider 
what may happen to us, whether good, bad, 
or indifferent: whether it will elate us, or 
whether it will overwhelm us with anguish. 
Let us behold all events in the providence 
of God who, with incomprehensible love, 
employs His wisdom, power, and goodness 
in the guidance of so small a creature, in 
order to make it arrive at blessedness. 

III. Point 

See how offended God is when we with- 
draw from the hands of His sweet provi- 
dence, in order to conduct ourselves accord- 
ing to our own caprice ! O how displeased 
He was with the children of Israel for hav- 
ing committed that fault ! Abandoning His 
sweet providence, they wished to have a 



Digitized by 



162 THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD. 



king to govern them, and they became 
wretched. 

Affections. 

0 eternal Father ! Thy providence gov- 
erns all things. It is, indeed, strange that, 
being children of a Father who watches 
over us with so vigilant an eye, we should 
have any other solicitude than to serve and 
loveHimwelL " Ah !" said St, Francis de 
Sales, " my soul has no other refuge than 
the holy providence of God- O my God, 
Thou hast taught me this lesson from my 
youth, and forever shall I proclaim Thy 
marvels.'* 

1 adore Thee^ O sovereign Wisdom, 
Power, and Goodness, who so lovingly di- 
rects all the moments of my life. O religious 
souls ! our true to-morrow is Divine Prov* 
idence. Behold the lilies of the fields, they 
neither sow nor do they spin, and the sweet 



Digitized by 



THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD. 163 



providence of our heavenly Father clothes 
them better than Solomon was clothed in all 
his glory. O my God ! I desire henceforth 
to hold in great esteem all that may happen 
to me. No, I shall not say that I have many 
afflictions, mortifications, and trials, for 
Thou hast counted their number. I shall 
not consider them too heavy, for Thou hast 
weighed them, as well as the strength that 
Thou dost give me with which to support 
them. I shall not say that they last too 
long a time, for Thou hast estimated their 
value. 

O my Saviour, I wish no longer to inter- 
fere, I desire only to be conducted by 
Thee. The Shepherd who guides me is 
the Lord omnipotent. Nothing shall ever 
induce me to leave Him; no, never do I 
wish to meddle in what concerns me. Let 
Him make choice of my abode, my em- 
ployment, my consolation, my humilia- 



Digitized by 



164 THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD. 

tions, my health, my sickness, my death, 
my salvation. I desire only to follow His 
guidance, and to leave myself absolutely 
to Him. 



"i'JDsgitized by Google 



THE WILL OF GOD. 165 



THTRTY-SECOKD MEDITATION. 

THE WILL OF GOD. 

I. Point. 

Reflect that since our salvation depends 
on the will of God, it is not to be doubted 
that all our perfection, all our happiness 
likewise rest thereon. Ah, how happy and 
peaceful will be the heart that, by love 
and total submission, realizes in all things 
that the divine will is good, pleasant, and 
perfect ! 

II. Point 

Eeflect that the will of God is the sover- 
eign queen of the universe. Nothing is 
done but in obedience to it. It ordains 
everything except sin, and we should re- 



Digitized by 



166 THE WILL OF QOD. 



gard all in this blessed will, without ever 
attempting to ascribe secondary causes. O 
how happy would religious souls be, if they 
considered all things in this happy source, 
and if they received all events as coming 
from His holy will ! In all circumstances 
we should endeavor to hear these words of 
Habacuc, addressed to the Prophet Daniel: 
" Take what the Lord sends thee." 

III. Point 

Eeflect that the eternal Son of God came 
upon earth to teach the submission and 
reverence due the divine will, not only in 
so far as He said that He came not to do 
His own will, but that of His Father, but 
furthermore by His resignation: " Father, 
if it be possible, let this chalice pass away; 
nevertheless, Thy will, not Mine, be done." 
This good Master, moreover, teaches us to 
ask daily that the will of God may be done 



Digitized by 



TSE WILL Of GOD. W 



on earth as it is in heaven. Finally, He con- 
cluded the whole course of His mortal 
life by the surrender of Himself to the 
will and disposition of His eternal Father: 
" My Father, I remit My spirit into Thy 
hands." 

Affections. 

O holy and divine will of my God ! since 
the true characteristic and infallible mark 
of the daughters of my holy Congregation 
is to see you and to follow you in all things, 
I wish most earnestly to undertake this 
blessed exercise. 0 sweet will, how shall 
I know you in order that I may follow you ? 
It is, indeed, good for me to adhere to 
Thee, 0 my God. I behold Thy will in 
Thy commandments. If I observe them, 
I shall be loved by Thee and by Thy 
Father. I recognize it in my rules, my 
vows, and observances, and therefore I 



Digitized by 



168 THE WILL OF GOD. 



shall endeavor to observe them carefully, 
for Thou hast said: " Vow ye, and pay to 
the Lord, your God." I know it in the 
direction of my Superiors, for God has said: 
" Be subject to your Superiors, and obey 
them; he who hears them, hears Me." I 
shall recognize it in treating with my 
neighbors. Whatsoever you wish your 
brother to do to you, do to him in like man- 
ner. In short, as I behold this divine will 
in all things, I shall by God's grace strive 
to honor it, and I shall follow it in every 
event of my life. 

Ah ! self-will, it is time for you to die, 
since I no longer desire to live but in the 
will of my God. I wish to follow it as my 
princess and mistress. Let it be inscribed 
in large characters on the first page of the 
book of my soul. My own judgment, no 
longer shall you be permitted to discern, 
to discourse, or to see; it is sufficient for 



Digitized by 



THE WILL OF GOD. 169 



you to submit yourself wholly to the divine 
dispensation. 0 my God ! conduct me ac- 
cording to Thy will. Make me suffer from 
cold, from heat, from light, from darkness, 
in my labors and in my repose. If Thou 
dost conduct me even to the gates of death, 
under Thy guidance I shall not fear, 

Tes, O heavenly Father, may Thy will 
be done on earth, where consolations are 
rare and trials innumerable! Take as a 
daily practice, O my soul, to say when 
something disturbs you, " Let not my will, 
but that of my God be accomplished." 



Digitized by 



170 COSCLJTSlOir OF mS &MT&EAT. 



THIRTY-THIRD MEDITATION. 

DETACHMENT AND THE CONCLUSION Off UtE 
BETREAT. 

I. Point 

Reflect what a favor God has bestowed 
upon you in this retreat, by giving you so 
many good inspirations and lights for your 
welfare. All should be directed to this one 
end, total self -detachment, so that you may 
hereafter be able to say truly and effica- 
ciously: " Naked came I from the womb 
of my mother, and naked shall I return 
thither. The Lord gave [me life], the 
Lord hath taken [it] away. Blessed be 
His holy name! " 

II. Point. 

Consider the happy condition in which 



Digitized by 



CONCL USION OF TEE RET RE A T. 171 



perfect detachment from all things places 
the soul, namely, that she sighs only for 
her Jesus. It is the glory of the Sula- 
mitess to be alone with her King. She 
exclaims: "My Beloved to me, and I to 
Him." Thus may we keep our affections 
so pure and so firmly fixed upon God, 
that nothing may attach itself to us, and 
we may attach ourselves to nothing what- 
soever. 

III. Point 

Eeflect what an injury you do your soul, 
if you allow it to be attached to anything; 
for if Our Lord should find you in the 
amiable and holy detachment of the chil- 
dren of God, He will take you into His 
arms as He did St. Martial in order to be- 
stow upon you the utmost perfection of His 
love. Blessed, therefore, are detached souls, 
for Our Lord will clothe them with Him- 
self! 



Digitized by 



172 CONCL USION OF THE RETREA T. 



Affections. 

Behold, O Lord ! a poor, miserable, and 
insignificant creature before the throne of 
Thy divine mercy, conjuring Thy paternal 
goodness to accept these little, though at 
the same time great, renunciations. Take 
from me all that clings to my soul, O 
Lord. I except nothing, tear me from my- 
self. Yes> self, I leave you forever, with 
no desire to take you back again, unless 
Our Lord expressly commands me to do so. 
O desires! O affections! O creatures! O 
all things ! I divest myself entirely of you. 

O most sweet Jesus! who didst come 
naked into the world, and who didst die 
naked upon the cross, what else hast Thou 
taught me except to live detached from all 
things and to sing unceasingly in desire 
and deed, " Live Jesus, destitute of Father 
and Mother on the cross! Live His most 



Digitized by 



CONCLUSION OF THE RETREAT. 173 



holy detachment ! live Mary, deprived of 
her Son at the foot of the cross ! Live her 
most holy renunciation ! " Yes, Lord 
Jesus! may my heart remain entirely di- 
vested of all things, even of goods the most 
spiritual, that Thou mayst be simply and 
absolutely all things to it. 

My soul, proceed henceforth like your 
divine Model on the path of this world, 
destitute of all things. From the moment 
that you find your heart desiring to attach 
itself to anything whatever, cast all at the 
feet of Jesus, and there renew the general 
and particular resolutions of your retreat, 
so that being clothed with Jesus Christ, you 
may live in newness of life. Amen. 



Digitized by 



LETTER OF MOTHER JANE FRAN- 
CES FREMIOT DE CHANTAL 



TO THE LATE DEAR AND GOOD MOTHER DE 
CHATEL, FULL OF INSTRUCTION AND OF GREAT 
UTILITY FOR ANNUAL RETREATS. 

My very dear Daughter: 

You wish me to tell you what you are 
to do in your retreat Ah ! my child, you 
know that I am not capable of saying much 
to you on this subject. However, to sat- 
isfy your kind heart and to condescend to 
your humility, I shall say that on the first 
day of retreat, we should not begin to pre- 
pare for confession. We should occupy 
our mind in recollection, keeping our soul 
tranquil in the presence of God, so that 
later on, like pure water under the rays of 
that beautiful Sun, we may clearly see to 

the bottom. The following day we should 
174 



Digitized by GoOglC 



THE ANNUAL RETREAT. 175 



make our general examen very sweetly, 
without eagerness, effort, or curiosity, I 
would not advise any one to accustom her- 
self, to write her annual confession out at 
length, although those who find it neces- 
sary are at liberty to do so. Since the first 
three or four days should be employed in 
the purgative way, you may take the first 
and last meditations of Philothea, or any 
others like them. On the following day, 
the Sisters should reflect sweetly on what 
our meek Saviour has done for love of us, 
and to redeem us. On the last days, we 
should make use of a book which treats of 
the infinite love and eternal riches of this 
great God; for toward the end of the re- 
treat we must endeavor to strip our heart 
of all that we know may cling to it. We 
should place at the feet of Our Lord alt 
those garments, one after the other, suppli- 
cating Him to keep them, and to clothe us 



Digitized by 



176 THE ANNUAL RETREAT. 



with Himself, and thus, naked and despoiled 
before the divine Goodness, we should 
again cast ourselves into the arms of His 
providence, leaving to Him the care and 
government of our whole being. Believe 
me, my daughter, nothing will be wanting 
to us. Never should we charge ourselves 
with any care, desire, affection, or attach- 
ment; for, since we have surrendered all 
to Our Lord, we must permit Him to gov- 
ern us, while we think only of pleasing 
Him, either by suffering or by action. 

With regard to gaining the indulgence 
granted to Eeligious who make a retreat, 
you should not have the least fear of not 
gaining it on account of being unable to 
meditate in detail, nor to meditate with 
the understanding during the time of 
prayer. God has given you a method of 
more simple and intimate intercourse with 
His goodness. But, my child, behold what 



Digitized by 



THE ANNUAL RETREAT. 177 



you should do: you should read attentively 
the points upon which you desire to medi- 
tate, if you are free to do so, and on reading 
them, withdraw your mind devoutly to 
God. This reading will for you take the 
place of meditation. By it your mind will 
always receive great benefit; and though 
it may not be perceptible to you, it will 
benefit you none the less for that. Having 
fulfilled your obligation by this reading, 
later on, during prayer, in your own simple 
and loving method, I repeat, that you will 
more than fully satisfy for your meditation, 
and for this reason: God being infinite in 
greatness, comprehends all mysteries; con- 
sequently, in possessing God, you have the 
essence of the mystery upon which you 
meditate. A very spiritual, learned, and 
virtuous priest, belonging to a religious Or- 
der, confirmed me in this opinion. Yes, my 
very dear daughter, our annual retreat is 



Digitized by 



178 THE ANNUAL RETREAT. 

a most important exercise, and we should 
try to make it with the utmost devotion and 
fidelity. I consider that it will be very 
useful to your daughters, to have read at 
table the " Exercises of Dom Sens de St. 
Catharine " : for, as His Lordship, that is 
to say, the blessed Father, who was then 
alive, remarked to me, it is comprehensive, 
and the style pleasing, for it is written 
in that of the saints, flying immortification 
and detesting the researches of self-love. 
"With regard to meditation, give to your 
daughters points that are striking, sweet, 
solid, and touching. 

I am, in the divine love, my very dear 
daughter, your humble and unworthy Sis- 
ter and servant in Our Lord, 

Sister Jane Frances FrAmiot, 
of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin. 

Visitation Convent, Paris, September 
18, 1622. 



Digitized by 



AN EXAMEN AEEANGED BY 
MOTHEE DE CHANTAL, 

TO ASSIST IN MAKING AN ANNUAL CONFES- 
SION. 

In the first place, examine yourself on 
your progress or failing since your last 
retreat, which is made from year to year. 
Whether you have not acquired some bad 
habit, not previously possessed. Cast your 
eyes on the most ordinary imperfections, 
temptations, repugnances, and difficulties 
that you experience in the Eules, Consti- 
tutions, and Customs, seeking their source 
and origin, and discovering them with sim- 
plicity. Confess them, and make your re- 
newal with courage and with the resolution 
to tend courageously to the perfection of 

your state, by the exercise of the virtues 
179 



Digitized by 



180 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



that will be recommended to you in a par- 
ticular manner. 

How do you receive the sacraments ? Do 
you sometimes approach them through rou- 
tine and imitation, through fear, rather than 
through devotion ? Do you lose their fruit 
by want of preparation ? 

In going to confession, are you satisfied 
to make yourself known as worthy of ab- 
jection ? If so, you will confess your sins 
very simply, and in humble terms. Tou 
will freely tell your faults and all that can 
render you more confused and ashamed in 
presence of the confessor. 

Are you faithful in correcting the faults 
that you confess ? Do you make reiterated 
acts of contrition before going to confes- 
sion ? Having confessed, are you exact in 
thanking God for this grace, which is, as- 
suredly, very great? 

Do you perform some special devotion, 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF C0KSC1ENCE. 181 



either before or after holy communion? 
Some practices of virtue for this intention, 
to keep your mind recollected in memory 
of this benefit ? 

Are you distracted soon after receiving 
holy communion ? Are you more humble, 
sweet, and cordial on the day of commun- 
ion ? For this is the fruit which you should 
draw from holy communion. 

Are you careful to make your inten- 
tions at the commencement of each exercise 
and each important action, offering them 
to God for His glory and in honor of the 
Blessed Virgin, or for some other intention? 

Are you tepid in prayer and during your 
practices of piety? Do they weary you? 
Do you sometimes find the Office long, 
meditation difficult, spiritual exercises la- 
borious, the returns that you make to God 
painful? Do you perform your exercises 
with inattention ? Do you resist the lights 



Digitized by 



182 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



that God gives you, either to do good or 
to avoid evil, paying no attention whatever 
to them, so as to commit your imperfec- 
tions more freely, and not to undertake the 
good that is apparent? 

How do you go to the Office, and in 
what manner do you comport yourself while 
there, at prayer, and during holy Mass? In 
your examens, do you fail in careful prepa- 
ration, and in subjecting your mind to fol- 
low the teachings that have been given you 
on this subject, observing what is said of 
it in the Custom Book? 

Are you prompt in rejecting distractions ? 
Do you give rise to them by not keeping 
strict custody of eyes on certain occasions, 
or by not keeping your mind recollected 
during the day, amusing yourself with 
trifles? 

How do you observe the Rule, the Con- 
stitutions, and especially your sacred vows ? 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 183 



Do you obey exactly in all things ; promptly, 
without delay; simply, without reply; lov- 
ingly, without chagrin; cordially and with 
a good heart, without murmur; humbly, 
without criticising and censuring the com- 
mand ? Are you more exact to an honor- 
able command and one of importance, than 
to those that are trifling and abject ? 

Do you disobey through negligence, f or- 
getfulness, idleness, or stubbornness, with 
deliberation, without love for obedience, 
or for the person who commands, through 
want of esteem for the command, in things 
of small importance or otherwise ? Accuse 
yourself carefully on this matter, for it is 
important. 

Have you entertained aversion for the 
Superioress, causing you to pass unfavorable 
judgment on her actions and words; that 
she has spoken or acted through passion, 
self-interest, particular affection, vanity, 



Digitized by 



184 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



and the like? But what would be worse, 
have you despised her in your heart by not 
esteemingher orders, her conduct, her judg- 
ment, and especially in what relates to the 
mortifications and corrections which she 
has given you? This is the true mark by 
which to know your defects. Have you 
murmured and complained of her to the 
Sisters, and even to seculars? In accusing 
yourself in confession, or in treating of 
your conscience affairs with a priest, have 
you made known her defects, or those of 
others, in order to excuse your own, or un- 
der pretext of being well understood? 
Have you failed in respect to her, by re*- 
plying to or contradicting her through pas- 
sion, with audacity, before the Sisters, re- 
fusing to obey in order to do your own will, 
through stubbornness or otherwise? Our 
obedience should be established on perfect 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 185 

abnegation of self-will and of our own 
judgment. 

"With regard to holy poverty, are you, in 
effect and affection, a proprietor of some- 
thing, no matter how small? Have you 
murmured when something was wanting to 
you, or when what was given to you was 
not according to your liking, whether with 
respect to food, clothing, medicine, bed- 
ding, warmth, or some other corporal con- 
venience? 

Have you asked for, taken, or given any- 
thing without leave? Have you desired, 
asked for, or retained any unnecessary ar- 
ticle, foreseeing that it would be useful 
to you ? 

Ji you have somecharge, have you served 
the Sisters without choice? Have you will- 
ingly given them what was in your care, 
without any other consideration than that 
of necessity? 



Digitized by 



186 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



Have you preferred yourself in the dis- 
tribution of things, no matter what ? Our 
poverty should be stripped of all things. 

Our chastity should be angelic. Examine 
yourself with regard to your imagination, 
thoughts, desires. Make the examen on this 
point very simple, though faithful, and 
accuse yourself with most generous humil- 
ity and confidence of the faults which you 
have observed. 

EXAMEN WITH EEGABD TO SELF. 

Well-ordered charity will cause you to 
care for the purity and advancement of 
your soul in perfection, and to have very 
little anxiety for your body. The care of 
the latter you will leave to your Supe- 
rioress. 

Do you esteem yourself above your 
neighbor ? Do you desire to be esteemed, 
and for this end, do you boast of yourself 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 187 



in some way or other? Do you pretend to 
understand spiritual matters, speaking of 
the interior, saying energetic words to main- 
tain your own opinion, and even at times 
doing so stubbornly, through vanity and 
pride? Do you speak advantageously of 
yourself, of your belongings, of the good 
which you have done and which you are 
doing, proposing yourself as an example, 
under pretext of edifying your neighbor, or 
of encouraging her to imitate you? Do 
you speak of your relations, of your posses- 
sions in the world, of the honor there ren- 
dered you, and even of vain things, such 
as dances, theatres, dress, promenades, ad- 
vantageous offers of marriage, and similar 
follies, amusing yourself by thinking of 
them, and flattering yourself in the vain 
belief that you are esteemed and loved ? Do 
you inquire indirectly of what is said of 
you in your absence ? or, rather, when some- 



Digitized by 



188 EXAM EN OF CONSCIENCE. 



thing has been said in your praise, do you en- 
deavor to shorten the conversation, or do you 
add some jocose words calculated to prolong 
the discourse and increase the praise, either 
of yourself or of those whom you love? 
Do you seek the society of certain per- 
sons, not on account of their merit, their 
virtue, and the respect that you owe them, 
but through vanity, because they love you, 
make much of you, and praise you; because 
it is an honor for you that they know you, 
that they willingly see you, that they es- 
teem you for your mind, judgment, and 
conversation ? 

Are you delighted to speak of the conver- 
sations that you have had with some person 
of distinction, repeating the advice asked of 
you, and the replies that you have made, 
when you judge them apropos? All this 
is very vain. 

Do you take pleasure in and amuse your- 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 189 



self by relating your dreams, and express- 
ing your thoughts through vanity, desiring 
that your hearers interpret them in your 
favor? Are you sorry to hear others 
praised, or to know that they are esteemed 
and loved, judging that all this turns to 
your disadvantage ? Doyou try to lessen the 
praise bestowed upon them, either by your 
words or by your silence, or what would be 
still worse, by relating their defects through 
jealousy, pride, envy, fearing not to be 
loved, esteemed, and preferred? 

Do you resent humiliations and correc- 
tions ? Do you murmur in thought or word 
against them ? Have you diminished your 
affection or conceived some aversion and 
want of confidence toward those who have 
been instrumental in correcting you, or 
who have warned you of your faults ? Are 
you grieved to be employed in things low 
and vile? Are you disgusted with having 



Digitized by 



190 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



trifling employments, preferring and occu- 
pying yourself more assiduously in things 
that are high and honorable, desiring the 
first offices under any pretext whatever? 
This is very injurious, and an assured mark 
of little virtue. 

Do you yield to impatience in trifles? 
Are you subject to feelings of anger? Do 
you give expression to them in word or 
action? or do you overcome yourself? 

Are the faults you commit owing to im- 
pulse, inadvertence, or for a reason long 
and deliberately entertained with regard to 
the matter under consideration? Do you 
perform actions through spite upon the 
slightest contradictions? Are the words 
that you use to gratify your resentment 
sharp, scolding, proud, cold, dry, sarcastic, 
intended to annoy the person who has sad- 
dened you, or are they revengeful, show- 
ing your passion ? Do you look coldly at 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 191 



her, reply to her in monosyllables, or pre- 
tend not to hear her, and similar defects ? 

Have you acquiesced in the will of sec- 
ulars, and treated them with human re- 
spect, through fear of displeasing them? 
Have you remained away from the Office 
and the other exercises without necessity, 
in order to entertain them with vain and 
frivolous subjects ? Have you listened long 
to unnecessary news and to useless things 
without interrupting them, through the 
pleasure that you take in them. Do you, 
although seeing their vanity, laugh at their 
folly, and commit acts of levity and world- 
liness, thus encouraging them to become 
too familiar toward you? Being too free 
with them leads to evil, and to the detri- 
ment of your perfection. 

Do you multiply words? Do you use 
exaggerated expressions in order needlessly 
to testify your affection ? Do you praise 



Digitized by 



192 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



your friends, telling them in unrestrained 
terms that they are esteemed, that they are 
preferred, that they are spoken well 
of in their absence, that they are much 
thought of, and that people wish to see 
them ? On the other hand, are you at times 
too cold, not testifying the devout, sweet, 
and holy cordiality of your Institute? 

Do you tell trifling falsehoods through 
precipitation or inadvertence, to excuse 
yourself, to embellish your conversation? 
Do you disguise the truth, concealing un- 
der a specious pretext your intentions in 
slight and indifferent matters and for vari- 
ous motives? Do you often do this, espe- 
cially in giving an account of your inte- 
rior? or what would be still worse, does 
this happen in confession? 

Do you resort to some artifice to show 
that you are not well, or that you have need 
of something, without saying so frankly 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 193 



and asking for it, for fear of being consid- 
ered tender and immortified ? 

Do you pretend to have more regret for 
your faults than you actually entertain in 
your heart? You will know this, if you 
are as contrite for them when you have 
recognized them and when no one but your- 
self has seen them, as when you tell them or 
are corrected for them. Do the tears that 
you shed, or the exaggerated words that you 
use, proceed from pride, which is displeased 
that we are known to be guilty, and pleased 
to have it known that we ourselves recog- 
nize our faults, and have a bad opinion of 
ourselves, and of all that we do? 

Do you make vain reflections, when 
obliged to give an account of the good you 
have done, of the extraordinary graces that 
God has given you in prayer, speaking only 
in monosyllables and pretending to be 
ashamed while telling your faults ? All that 



Digitized by 



194 EX A MEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



is pride, which makes you fear that others 
will believe that you make much account 
of these matters, and that is a great defect 
in simplicity. Do you conceal your faults, 
especially when they are abject, saying 
many useless words to prove the necessity 
that caused you to commit them? 

Do you testify more appearance of paiu 
than you feel when you are treated as a 
sick person, or when on some occasion you 
are preferred to others? The refusal that 
you make of viands, of some convenience, 
of some service, does it show vain courage 
and duplicity, rather than a desire of suf- 
fering the want or the inconvenience? 
You will know this, if your heart remains 
tranquil in suffering, and if you do not 
amuse yourself by thinking of what is 
wanting to you. 

Do you feign to refuse some ameliora- 
tion through virtue, when, in truth, you 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 195 



do so through immortification, the thing pro- 
posed not being agreeable to you ? All this 
is hypocrisy and vanity. Do you play the 
courageous before others, when they sym- 
pathize with you about your pains and suf- 
ferings, while all the time you are anxious 
to discover the cause of your illness, and 
to seek for remedies even the most expen- 
sive? 

Are you troubled when you are not 
thought so ill as you really are, or as you 
appear to be, or when similar neglects oc- 
cur? Do you note even your most trifling 
sufferings ? 

Do you say words through a movement 
of sensuality, cunningly making known 
what you like and desire, so that it may be 
given you? 

Are you fastidious in eating, whether in 
health or in sickness, delicate and hard to 
please, wishing only what is to your taste, 



Digitized by 



196 EX AMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



although it may be injurious to your 
health? 

Do you complain of not being well 
treated, and that your Superiors are not 
anxious to give you what your appetite re- 
quires, when you are ill ? When the food is 
to your taste, do you take too much, al- 
though it may be only fruit and water? 
Do you worry about the length of the 
nights, your sufferings, and the necessary 
remedies ? Do you obey the infirmarian or 
the doctor with regret, doing what they or- 
der with chagrin and complaint ? 

See, in fine, how you exercise yourself in 
the mortification of your heart, which is 
practised by renouncing self-will, self- 
judgment, the passions and inclinations, 
submitting in all things, condescending 
cheerfully to the will of others. 



I ""Dtgitjzed by Google 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 197 



EXAMEN OF THE STATE OF THE SOUL TOWARD 
OUR NEIGHBOR. 

Do you love every one cordially for the 
love of God, as well in particular as in gen- 
eral? 

If you love your neighbor or the Sisters 
who are disagreeable as much as those 
whose qualities naturally please you, your 
love is good; if you love them less, it is 
imperfect, and frequently prejudicial. 
Examine whether you have an upright 
heart in their regard, whether you do them 
no harm, whether you pray as fervently 
for them as for those that please you. Do 
you fail in support toward your neighbor, 
either with regard to her corporal or spirit- 
ual infirmities ? Do you judge rashly of her 
actions, particularly of the actions of her 
whom you do not love? 

Are you addicted to suspicions on the 



Digitized by 



198 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



slightest provocation? Do you criticise 
your neighbor's intentions, her reasons, ac- 
cording to your own fancy, and to her 
disadvantage, sometimes through passion, 
again through vanity, pretending to a dis- 
cernment of character and natural inclina- 
tions, etc. ? Do you boast of the judgment 
you have formed, and sometimes assert it 
as true, from the experience you have had 
yourself of similar faults? 

Do you without real necessity speak of 
her sins, her imperfections ? Do you relate 
her bad humors, pitying her, but through 
passion and with exaggeration, in order to 
gratify your aversion for her, or to avenge 
some slight received from her? 

Have you experienced a feeling of joy, 
when those from whom you have received 
some contradiction have been mortified? 
That is a spirit of revenge. Have you re- 
peated some trifling anecdote to the Sisters, 



Digitized by 



EXAMEit OF CONbClEKCE. 19& 



that they may know what they who have 
displeased you have done? Examine 
whether you have not directly told them 
of it from the same motive, whether you 
have not exaggerated the fault, or misin- 
terpreted it to your own advantage. That 
would be a grievous fault against charity. 

Have you despised your Sisters in 
thought or in deed on account of their 
mind, their manner, their countenance, 
throwing out little hints with regard to 
their origin, that they are beneath you? 
That would be a serious fault, insupport- 
able vanity. If you yourself are of low 
extraction, have you in your heart or in 
your actions preferred yourself to others? 
Have you made use of disagreeable, carping, 
acrimonious words, which might offend and 
displease them, and this even to seculars, 
contesting and replying with impatience, 
arrogantly maintaining your own opinion, 



Digitized by 



200 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 



even in small matters? That would be a 
great and very disedifying fault 

Have you disputed imperiously, despis- 
ing the judgment and advice of those with 
whom you spoke? Have you taken pleas-* 
ure in acting in this manner, being deter- 
mined to quarrel or to give offence ? Have 
you long entertained such a thought? That 
is all very bad. 

Are you inclined to envy, which rouses 
satisfaction in your heart when they whom 
you see esteemed commit faults, and when 
these faults are noticed? Do you find it 
difficult to allow them to be excused or 
consoled in anything ? Examine your heart 
thoroughly on this subject, and acknowl- 
edge your transgressions as frankly and 
simply as possible. If there is anything 
that worries you, — doubt, temptation or 
difficulty — ask to be enlightened thereon. 

This examen contains special direction, 



Digitized by 



EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 201 



and gives not only a method for confession, 
but, moreover, one for the practice of the 
virtues. It is very useful once a year to 
see thoroughly the state of the soul, al- 
though one is not obliged to accuse herself 
so minutely of all these matters unless she 
wishes to do so. A traveller should discover 
the bad road to avoid it, and the 
good one to follow it. Self-love has spread 
its snares throughout the whole course of 
the spiritual life, so that it is impossible to 
escape it, unless, as says the glorious St. 
Anthony, by passing under it, we 
humble ourselves profoundly, exam- 
ine ourselves seriously, accuse ourselves 
sincerely, and, in short, work out our sal- 
vation with a holy trembling, a chaste 
and filial fear, which will make us walk 
in simplicity of heart, in holiness, in jus- 
tice, and in truth before God. May the 
divine goodness grant us the grace to ac- 



Digitized by 



202 EXAMEN OF CONSCIENCE. 

complish this undertaking, through the in- 
tercession of His most pure Mother, His 
holy foster-father, St. Joseph, and of the 
holy Founder, St. Francis de Sales. 



PRINTED BY BBNZIGER BROTHERS, NEW YORK. 



Digitized by 



STANDARD CATHOLIC BOOKS 



PUBLISHED BY 

BENZIGER BROTHERS, 

n: NEW YORK: Chicago: 

343 Main St. 36 and 38 Barclay St. 211-213 Madison St 



Abandonment ; or. Absolute Surrender of Self to Divine 
Providence. By Rev. J. P. Caussade, S.J. 3amo, net y o 40 
Altar Boy's Manual, Little. Illustrated. 3 2ino, Jo 25 
American author Series of Catholic Juveniles. x6mo, cloth. 
The Blissylvania Post-Office. By M. A. Taggart. x6mo, o 50 
Three Girls and Especially One. By M. A. Taggart. 16010,050 
By Branscome River. By M. A. Taggart. i6mo, o 50 

The Madcap Set at St. Anne's. By M. J. Brunowe. z6mo, o 50 
Tom's Luck-Pot. By Mary T. waggaman. x6mo, o 50 
An Heir of Dreams. By S. M. O'Malley. x6mo, o 50 

A Summer at Woodville. By Anna T. Sadlier. i6mo, o 50 
Analysis of the Gospels. Lambert, iamo, net, x 25 

Art of Profiting by Our Faults, according to St. Francis 
de Sales. By Rev. J. TISSOT. 32mo, net, o 40 

Aser the Shepherd. By Marion Ames Taggart. x6mo, net, o 35 
Bezaleel. By Marion Ames Taggart. x6mo, net, o 35 

Bible, The Holy. x2mo, cloth, o 80 

Birthday Souvenir, or Diary. With a Subject of Meditation 
for Every Day. By Mrs. A. E. Buchanan. 32010, o 50 

Blessed Ones of x888. Illustrated. x6mo, o 50 

Blossoms of the Cross. Dedicated to My Companions in 
Suffering for their Pious Entertainment. By Emmy Giehrl. 
12H0, cloth, x 25 

Bone Rules ; or, Skeleton of English Grammar. By Rev. J. B. 

Tabb. x6mo, o 50 

Boys' and Girls' Mission Book. By the Redemptorist 
Fathers. 48mo, %o 35 

Breve Compendium Theologlc Dogmatics et Mora lis una 
cum aliquibus Notionibus Theologies Canonicae Liturgies, 
Pastoralis et Mysticas, ac Philosophies Christianas. Auctore 
P. J. Berthier, M.S. Quarta editio, aucta et emendata. 
8vo, cloth, I net, 2 50 

BUGG, Lelia Hardin. Correct Thing for Catholics. i6mo, o 75 

A Lady. Manners and Social Usages. x6mo, o 75 

■ Prodigal's Daughter, The, and Other Stories. x2ino f x 00 



Digitized by 



Catechism Explained, The. An Exhaustive Exposition of the 
Christian Religion, with Special Reference to the Present 
State of Society and the Spirit of the Age. A Practical 
Manual for the use of the Preacher, the Catecbist, the Teacher, 
and the Family. From the original of Rev. Francis Spiraoo. 
Edited by Rev. Richard F. Clarke, S.J. 8vo, cloth, 
720 pages, net, 2 50 

Canonical Procedure in Disciplinary and Criminal Cases 
of Clerics. By Rev. F. Droste. Edited by the Right 
Rev. S. G. Messmer, D.D. New edition. i2mo, net, 1 50 
Cantata Catholica. Containing a large collection of Masses, 
etc. Hellebusch. Oblong 4to, net, 2 00 

Catechism of Familiar Things. Their History and the Events 
which led to their Discovery. Illustrated, iamo, *x 00 

Catholic Belief. x6mo. 

Paper, *o.25 ; 25 copies, 4.25 ; 50 copies, 7.50 ; xoo copies, 12 50 
Cloth, *o.so ; 25 copies, 8.50 ; 50 copies, 15.00 ; xoo copies, 25 00 
Catholic Ceremonies and Explanation of the Ecclesiastical 
Year. By the Abb6 Durand. With 96 illustrations. 24mo. 
Paper, *o.2s ; 25 copies, 4.25 ; 50 copies, 7.50 ; xoo copies, xa 50 
Cloth, *o.$o ; 25 copies, 8.50 ; 50 copies, 15.00 ; xoo copies, 25 00 
Catholic Father, The. A Manual of Instructions and Devo- 
- tions. By Bishop Egger. 640 pages, thin paper, 32010, to 75 
Catholic Home Annual. *o 25 

Catholic Home Library, xo volumes, xamo, each, o 45 
Catholic Worship. Brennan. Paper, «o. 15; per xoo, 900 
Cloth, *o.25 ; per xoo, 15 00 

Catholic Teaching for Children. By Winifride Wray. 

x6mo, cloth, o 40 

Charity the Origin of Every Blessing. x6mo, o 75 

Child of Mary. A Complete Prayer-Book for Children of 
Mary. 32010, to 60 

Child's Picture Prayer-Book. Illustrated in colors. Small 
32mo, to 25 

Child's Prayer-Book of the Sacred Heart. 32mo, $0 25 
Christian Anthropology. By Rev. J. Thein. 8vo, net, 2 50 
Christian Father, The. Paper, *o.25 ; per xoo, 12 50 

Cloth, *o.35 ; per 100, 21 00 

Christian Mother, The. Paper, *o.25 ; per xoo, 12 50 

Cloth, *o.35 ; per xoo, 21 00 

Christian Philosophy. A Treatise on the Christian Soul. By 
the Rev. JOHN T. Driscoll, S.T.L. x2mo, I net, 1 25 

Christ in Type and Prophecy. By Rev. A. J. Maas, S.J. 

2 vols., xsmo, net, 4 00 

Circus-Rider's Daughter, The. A novel. By F.v. Brackel. 

iamo, x 25 

College Boy, A. A Story. By Anthony Yorke. iamo, 
cloth, o 85 

Comedy of English Protestantism, The. Edited by A. F. 

Marshall, B.A. Oxon. iamo, net, o 50 

Compendium Sacra Liturgls Tuxta Ritum Romanum. 

XEJ a r*kY> r TfAnam /~\ C T* a_-_ . 



WAPELHOR8T, O.S.F. 8VO, 



net, 2 50 



a 




Confessional, The. By Rt. Rev. A. Roeoel. I net, z oo 

Connor D'Arcv's Struggles. A novel. By Mrs, W. M. 

Bertholds. zamo, i a5 

Counsels of a Catholic Mother to Her Daughter. i6mo, o 50 
Crown of Mary, The. A Complete Manual of Devotion for 

Clients of the Blessed Virgin. 3*100, $0 60 

Crown of Thorns, The ; or, The Little Breviary of the Holy 

Pace. 32010, o 40 

Data of Modern Ethics Examined, The. By Rev. John J. 

Ming, S.J. zamo, net, a 00 

De Goesbriand, Right Rev. L. Jesus the Good Shepherd. 

x6mo, net, o 75 

The Labors of the Apostles, zamo, net, z 00 

Devotions and Prayers by St. Alphonsus. A Complete 

Prayer-Book. z6mo, ti 00 

Devotions and Prayers for the Sick-Room. By Rev. Jos. 

A. Krebs, C.SS.R. zamo, cloth, net, z 00 

Dion and the Sibyls. A classic novel. By Miles Gerald 

Keon. zamo, z 25 

Dorsey, Ella Loraine. Pickle and Pepper, xamo, o 85 

The Taming of Polly, umo, o 85 

Easy Language Lessons. »mo, o 50 

Egan, Maurice P. The Vocation of Edward Conway. A novel. 

i2mo, z 25 

Flower of the Flock.and Badgers of Belmont, zamo, o 85 

How They Worked Their Way. and Other Stories. © 75 

The Boys in the Block. 84mo, leatherette. o 35 

A Gentleman. i6mo, o 75 

English Reader. By Rev. Edward Connolly, S.J. zamo, *z 25 
Epistles and Gospels. 3amo, o 25 

Eucharistic Christ, The. Reflections and Considerations on 

the Blessed Sacrament. By Rev. A. TESNIERE. xamo, net, z 00 
Eucharistic Gems. A Thought About the Most Blessed 

Sacrament for Every Day. By Rev. L. C. Coelenbier. 

i6mo, o 75 

Examination of Conscience for the use of Priests who are 

Making a Retreat. By Gaduel. 32010, net, o 30 

Explanation of the Baltimore Catechism of Christian Doc- 
trine. By Rev. THOMAS L. KlNKEAD. z2mo, net, z 00 
Explanation of the Commandments, Illustrated. By 

Rev. H. ROLFUS, D.D. With a Practice and Reflection on 

each Commandment, by Very Rev. P. Girardey, C.SS.R. 

z6mo, o 75 

Explanation of the Gospels. Illustrated. *4mo. 

Paper, *o.as ; 95 copies, 4.25 ; 50 copies, 7.50 ; zoo copies, za 50 

Cloth, *o.so ; 25 copies, 8.50 ; 50 copies, 15.00 ; xoo copies, 35 00 
Explanation of the Holy Sacraments, Illustrated. By 

Rev. H. Rolfus, D.D. With a Reflection, Practice, and 

Prayer on each Sacrament, by Very Rev. F. Girardey, 

C.SS.R. z<>mo, o 75 

Explanation of the Mass. By Father von Cochem. zamo, z 35 



Digitized by 



Explanation op the Our Father and the Hail Mart. 

Adapted by Rev. Richard Brennan, LL.D. i6mo, o 75 
Explanation of the Salve Regina. By St. Alphonsus 

Liguori. x6mo, o 75 

Explanation of the Prayers and Ceremonies of the 

Mass. Illustrated. By Rev. D. I. Lanslots, O.S.B. With 

32 full-page illustrations. 221110, x 25 

Extreme Unction. Paper, *o.io; per 100, 5 00 

Fabiola. Illustrated Edition. By Cardinal Wiseman. 12010, o 90 

Edition de luxe, *6 00 

Fabiola"s Sisters. (Companion volume to "Fabiola.") By 

A. C. Clarke. Three editions in three weeks, xamo, o 90 
Finn, Rev. Francis J., S. J. Percy Wynn. xamo, o 85 

Tom Playfair. iamo, o 85 

Harry Dee. xamo, o 85 

Claude Lightfoot. 12m o, o 85 

Ethelred Preston, xamo, o 85 

That Football Game. 12m o, o 85 

Mostly Boys, iamo, o 85 

, My Strange Friend. 24mo, leatherette. o 25 

First Communicant's Manual. Small 32mo, $0 50 

Five O'clock Stories. x6mo, o 75 

Flowers of the Passion. Thoughts of St. Paul of the Cross. 

By Rev. LOUIS TH. DE JESUS-AGONISANT. 3amo, *o.so; 

per 100, ^ 25 00 

Following of Christ, The. By Thomas a Kempis. 

With Reflections. Small 32010, cloth, io 50 

Without Reflections. Small 32010, cloth, io 45 

Edition de luxe. Illustrated. French sheep, gilt edges, tx 50 
Four Gospels, The. 32010, net, o 10 

Francis de Sales, St. Introduction to a Devout Life. 

32mo, $0 50 
Guide for Confession and Communion. Translated by 

Mrs. Bennett-Gladstone. 3amo, to 60 

Maxims and Counsels for Every Day. 32010, net, o 35 

Game of Quotations from Catholic American Authors. 

Series I., net, o 25 

Series II., net, o 25 

Series III., net, o 25 

General Principles of the Religious Life. By Very Rev. 

Boniface F. Verheyen, O.S.B. 32010, net, o 30 

Glories of Divine Grace. From the Germao of Dr. M. Jos. 

Scheeben, by a Benedictine Monk. x2mo, net y 1 50 

Glories of Mary. By St. Alphonsus. 2 vols. 12010, net, a 50 
God Knowable and Known. Ronayne. 12010, net, x 25 
GROU, Rev. J., S.J. The Characteristics of True Devotion. A 

new edition, by Rev. Samuel H. Frisbee, S.J. x6mo, net, o 75 
The Ioterior of Jesus and Mary. Edited by Rev. SAMUEL 

H. Frisbee, S. J. i6mo, 2 vols., net, 2 00 

Goffine's Devout Instructions. Illustrated Bditioo. Preface 

by His Eminence Cardinal Gibbons. 8vo, oloth, x 00 

10 copies, 7.50; 25 copies, 17.30 ; 50 copies, 33 so 



Digitized by 



41 Golden Sands." Books by the Author of : 

Golden Sands. Little Counsels for the Sanctincation and 
Happiness of Daily Life. 32ino, 3 volumes, each, o 50 

Book of the Professed. 32mo, 
Vol. I. ) {net, o 75 

Vol. II. > Each with a steel-plate Frontispiece. < net, o 60 
Vol. III. ) (net, o 60 

Prayer. 32010, net, o 40 

The Little Book of Superiors. 32010, net, o 60 

Spiritual Direction. 32010, net, o 60 

Little Month of May. 32mo, flexible cloth, *o.2$ ; per 100, 15 00 

Little Month of the Poor Souls. 32010, flexible cloth, *o.2s ; 
per 100, i5 00 

Hints on Letter- Writing. x6mo, *o 60 

Hand-book of the Christian Religion. By Rev. W.Wilmers, 

S.J. Edited by Rev. J AMES Conway, S.J. 12010, net, 1 50 
Happy Year, A. Short Meditations for Every Day. By Abb£ 

Lasausse. j2mo, net, 1 00 

Heart of St. Jane Frances de Chantal, The. Thoughts 

and Prayers. 32010, net, o 40 

Help for the Poor Souls in Purgatory. Small 32010, \o 50 
Herchenbach, W. Armorer of Solingen, The. x6mo, o 45 

Wrongfully Accused. i6mo, o 45 

Inundation, The. i6mo, v / o 45 

Hidden Treasure ; or, The Value and Excellence of the Holy 

Mass. By St. Leonard of Port-Maurice. 32010, o 50 
History of the Catholic Church. By Dr. H. Brueck. 

2 vols., 8vo, net, 3 00 

History of the Catholic Church. Adapted by Rev. Richard 

Brennan, LL.D. With 90 illustrations. 8vo, 150 
History of the Mass and Its Ceremonies in the Eastern and 

Western Church. By Re v. John O'Brien, A.M. ismo, net, 1 25 
History of the Protestant Reformation in England and 

Ireland. Written in 1824-1827. By William Cobbett. 

Revised, with Notes and Preface, by Francis Aidan 

Gasquet, D.D., O.S.B. iamo, cloth, net, 0.50 ; paper, net, o 25 
Holy Face of Jesus, The. A Series of Meditations on the 

Litany of the Holy Face. 32x110, o 40 

Holy Gospels, The Four. 32010, net, o 10 

Hours Before the Altar : or, Meditatioos on the Holy 

Eucharist. By Mgr. de la Bouillerie. 32010, o 50 

How to Comfort the Sick. Especially adapted for the 

Instruction, Consolation, and Devotion of Religious Persons 

devoted to the Service of the Sick. By Rev. J OS. Aloysius 

Krebs, C.SS.R. i2mo, cloth. net, 1 00 

How to Get On. By Rev. Bernard Feeney. 12010, x 00 
How to Make the Mission. By a Dominican Father. x6mo, 

paper, *o.xo ; per xoo, 5 00 

Hunolt's Sermons. Complete Unabridged Edition, Translated 

from the original German edition of Cologne, X740, by the 

Rev. J. Allen, D.D. 12 vols., 8vo, net, 30 00 

Hunolt's Short Sermons. Abridged Edition. Arranged for 

all the Sundays of the Year. 5 vols., 8vo, \net, xo 00 



Digitized by 



Idols ; or, The Secret of the Rue Chaussee d'Antio. A novel. 

By RAOUL DE N AVERY. 12010, Z 85 

Illustrated Prayer-book for Children. 32010, to as 

Imitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary. After the Model of 
the Imitation of Christ. Translated by Mrs. A. R. Bennett- 
Gladstone. Small 32010, to 50 

Edition de luxe, with fine illustrations. Persian calf, gilt 
edges. 3amo, tx 50 

Imitation of the Sacred Heart. Arnoudt. x6mo, ti 25 

Indulgences, Practical Guide to. By Rev. P. M. Bernad, 
O.M.I. , o 75 

In Heaven We Know Our Own. Rev. Blot, S.J. x6mo, o 6b 

Instructions for First Communicants. Rev. Dr. J. Schmidt. 
Small xamo, net* o 50 

Instructions on the Commandments and the Sacraments. 
By St. LlGUORl. 32mo. Paper, 0.25 ; per 100, X2 50 

Cloth, 0.35 ; per 100, 21 00 

Introduction to a Devout Life. By St. Francis de Sales, 
Small 32010, cloth, $0 50 

Jack Hildreth Among the Indians. Edited by Marion Ames 
Taggart. A series of adventure stories, 
x. Winnetou, the Apache Knight, umo, o 85 

2. The Treasure of Nugget Mountain, xamo, o 85 

Keller, Rev. Dr. Joseph. The Blessed Virgin. Anecdotes and 
Examples to Illustrate the Honor due to the Blessed Mother 
of God. i6mo, cloth, o 75 

The Sacred Heart. Anecdotes and Examples to Illustrate 

the Honor and Glory due to the Most Sacred Heart of Our 
Lord. i6mo, cloth, o 75 

— The Most Holy Sacrament. Anecdotes and Examples to 
Illustrate the Honor and Glory due to the Most Holy Sacra- 
ment of the Altar. i6mo, cloth, o 75 

St. Anthony. Anecdotes Proving the Miraculous Power of 

St. Anthony of Padua. x6mo, cloth, o 75 

Key of Heaven. Large Type. With Epistles and Gospels. 
Small 32mo, o 40 

Klondike Picnic, A. By Eleanor C. Donnelly. i2tno, o 85 

KONINGS 1 Theologia Moralis. Novissimi Ecclesise Doctoris 
S. Alphonsi. Editio septima, auctior, et novis curis expolitior, 
curante Henrico Kuper, C.SS.R. Two vols, in one, half 
morocco, net* 4 00 

• Commentarium in Facultates Apostolicas. New, greatly 

enlarged edition. 12010, net* 2 25 

General Confession Made Easy. 32010, flexible, *o x$ 

Legends and Stories of the Holy Child Jesus from Many 
Lands. Collected by A. Fowler Lutz. x6mo, o 75 

Let no Man Put Asunder. A novel. By Josephine Mari£. 
i2mo, x 00 

Life and Acts of Leo Xlll. Illustrated. 8vo, 1 50 

Life of St. Aloysius Gonzaga. Richly illustrated. 8vo, net* % 50 

Life of St. Aloysius Gonzaga. Edited by Rev. J. F. X. 
O'Conor, S.J. iamo, ne t y o 75 

Life of St. Anthony. See St. Anthony. 



Digitized by Google 



Life of the Blessed Virgin, Illustrated. Adapted by Rev. 
Richard Brennan, LL.D. With fine half-tone illustrations, 
xamo, z 25 

Life of St. Catharine of Sienna. By Edward L. Ayme\ 
M.D. xamo, cloth, *i 00 

Life of Christ, Illustrated. By Father M. v. Cochem. 

With fine half-tone illustrations. x2tno, 1 25 

Life of Father Charles Sire, iamo, net % 1 00 

Life of St. Clare of Montefalco. umo, net, o 75 

Life of Ven. Mary Crescentia Hoss. iamo, net, 125 

Life of St. Francis Solanus. x6mo, net, o 50 

Life of St. Chantal. See under St Chantal, net, 4 00 

Life of Most Rev. John Hughes. i2mo, net, o 75 

Life of Father Jogues. wmo, net, o 75 

Life of Mlle. le Gras. iamo, net, x 25 

Life of Right Rev. J. N. Neumann, D.D. iamo, net, x 25 
Life of Fr. Francis Poilvache. 32010, paper, \net, o 20 
Life of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ and of His 
Blessed Mother. 600 illustrations. Cloth, net, 5 00 

Life, Popular, of St. Teresa of Jesus, iamo, net, o 75 
Life of Sister Anne Katharine Emmerich of the Order of 
St. Augustine. By Rev. Thomas Wegener, O.S.A. From 
the French by Rev. Francis X. McGowan, O.S.A. 8vo, 
cloth, net, 1 50 

Liguori, St. Alphonsus de. Complete Ascetical Works of. 
Centenary Edition. Edited by Rev. Eugene Grimm, C.SS.R. 
Price, per vol., net, x 25 

Each book is complete in itself, and any volume will be sold 
separately. 

Preparation for Death. - True Spouse of Christ, 2 

Way of Salvation and of vols. 
Perfection. Dignity and Duties of the 

Great Means of Salvation Priest, 
and Perfection. The Holy Mass. 

Incarnation, Birth, and In- The Divine Office, 
fancy of Christ. Preaching. 

The Passion and Death of Abridged Sermons for all the 
Christ. Sundays. 

The Holy Eucharist. Miscellany. 

The Glories of Mary, a vols. Letters, 4 vols. 

Victories of the Martyrs. Letters and General Index. 

Linked Lives. A novel. By Lady Douglas. 8vo, i 50 

Little Child of Mary. Large 48mo, %o 35 

Little Folks' Annual. o 05 

Little Manual of St. Anthony. 3amo, cloth, $0 60 

Lourdes. By R. F. Clarke, SJ. x6mo, illustrated, o 75 

Loyal Blue and Royal Scarlet. A Story of '76. By Marion 

Ames Taggart. iamo, cloth, o 85 

Manifestation of Conscience. Confessions and Communions 

in Religious Communities. 3amo, net, o 50 

Manual of Indulgenced Prayers. Small 3amo, %o 40 



Digitized by 



Manual of the Holy Eucharist. Conferences and Pious 
Practices, with Devotions for Mass, etc. Prepared by Rev. P. 
X. Lasance, Director of the Tabernacle Society of Cincinnati. 
Oblong 24010, to 75 

Manual of the Holy Family. Prayers and Instructions for 
Catholic Parents. 32010, cloth, to 60 

Marcella Grace. A novel. By Rosa Mulhotj-and. With 
illustrations after original drawings, xamo, x 25 

Marim Corolla. Poems by Rev. Edmund Hill, CP. 
j 2 mo, 1 25 

Marriage. By Very Rev. Pere Monsabre, O.P. Prom the 
French, by M. HOPPER. »mo, net, x 00 

May Devotions, New. Reflections on the Invocations of the 
Litany of Loretto. xnmo, \net, 1 00 

McCallen, Rev. James A., S.S. Sanctuary Boy's Illustrated 
Manual, ismo, , net, o 50 

Office of Tenebrae. xamo, \net, o 50 

Means of Grace, The. A Complete Exposition of the Seven 
Sacraments, of the Sacramentals, and of Prayer, with a 
Comprehensive Explanation of the 44 Lord's Prayer" and the 
" Hail Mary." By Rev. Richard Brennan, LL.D. With 180 
full-page and other illustrations. 8vo, cloth, 2.50; gilt, 
edges, 3.00 ; Library edition, half levant, 3 50 

Meditations (Baxter) for Every Day in the Year. By Rev. 
Roger Baxter, S.J. Small umo, net, x 25 

Meditations (Chaionon, S.J.) for the Use of the Secular 
Clergy. By Father Chaignon, S.J. From the French, by 
Rt. Rev. L. DE GOESBRIAND, D.D. 2 vols., 8vo, net, 4 00 

Meditations (Hamon's) for All the Days of the Year. 
By Rev. M. Hamon, S.S. From the French, by Mrs. Anne 
R. Bennett-Gladstone. 5 vols., x6mo, cloth, gilt top, each 
with a Steel Engraving, net, 5 00 

Meditations on the Month of Our Lady. From the Italian, 
by Rev. J. F. MULLANEY, LL.D. Oblong x6mo, o 75 

Meditations on the Last Words from the Cross. By 
Father Charles Perraud. With an introduction by Cardinal 
Perraud. Translated at St. Joseph's Seminary, Dunwoodie, 
N. Y. 24mo, cloth, {net, o 50 

Meditations on the Passion of Our Lord. By a Passionist 
Father. 32mo, *o.4o ; per xoo, 20 00 

Meditations (Perinaldo) on the Sufferings of Jesus Christ, 
xamo, net, o 75 

Meditations (Vercruysse), for Every Day in the Year, on the 
Life of Our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 vols., net, 2 75 

Miss Erin. A novel. By M. E. Francis, xamo, 1 as 

Mission Book, Boys' and Girls'. 48mo, $0 35 

Mission Book of the Redemptorist Fathers. 3amo, cloth, to 50 

Mission Book for the Married. By Very Rev. F. Girardey, 
C.SS.R. 3amo, to So 

Mission Book for the Single. By Very Rev. F. Girardey, 

C.SS.R. 3amo, to So 

Mistress of Novices, The, Instructed in Her Duties, xamo, 



cloth, 



net, 075 



8 




Moments Before the Tabernacle. By Rev. Matthew 
Russell, S.J. a^mo, net, o 40 

Monk's Pardon. A Historical Romance. By Raoul de 

NAVERY. X2XUO, 1 25 

Month op the Dead. 321110, o 50 

Month of May. Debussi, S.J. 321110, o 50 

Month, New, of Mary, St. Francis de Sales. 32mo, o 25 
Month, New, of St. Joseph, St. Francis de Sales. 32mo, o 25 
Month, New, of the Holy Angels, St. Francis de Sales. 

32010, o 25 

Moral Principles and Medical Practice, the Basis of 
Medical Jurisprudence. By Rev. CHARLES Coppens. S.J., 
Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in the John A. Creighton 
Medical College, Omaha, Neb., author of text-books in 
Metaphysics, Ethics, etc. 8vo, net, x 50 

Mr. Billy Buttons. A novel. By Walter Lecky. nmo, x 25 

Muller, Rev. Michael, C.SS.R. God the Teacher of Mankind. 
A plain, comprehensive Explanation of Christian Doctrine. 
q vols., crown 8vo. Per set, net, a 50 

The Church and Her Enemies. net, z xo 

The Apostles' Creed. net, x xo 

The First and Greatest Commandment. net, x 40 

Explanation of the Commandments, continued. Precepts 
of the Church. net, x 10 

Dignity, Authority, and Duties of Parents, Ecclesiastical 
and Civil Powers, Their Enemies. net, 1 40 

Grace and the Sacraments. net, x 25 

Holy Mass. net, x 25 

Eucharist and Penance. net, x xo 

Sacramentals— Prayer, etc. net, x 00 

■ Familiar Explanation of Catholic Doctrine, iatno, *x 00 

The Prodigal Son ; or, The Sinner's Return to God. 

8vq, net, x 00 

The Devotion of the Holy Rosary and the Five Scapulars. 

8vo, net, o 75 

The Catholic Priesthood. 2 vols., 8vo, net, 3 00 

My First Communion: The Happiest Day of My Life. 
Brennan. x6mo, illustrated, o 75 

Names that Live in Catholic Hearts. By Anna T. 
Sadlier. »mo, x 00 

Natural Law and Legal Practice. Lectures delivered at 
the Law School of Georgetown University, by Rev. R. I. 
Holaind, S.J. 8vo, cloth, net, x 75 

New Testament Studies. The Chief Events in the Life of Our 
Lord. By Rt. Rev. Mgr. THOMAS J. CONATY, D.D. lamo, 
cloth, illustrated, o 60 

New Testament, xamo. New, large type. The best edition 
published. Cloth, net, o 75 

New Testament, The. Illustrated Edition. With 100 fine 
full-page illustrations. Printed in two colors. x6mo, net, o 60 

New Testament. 32010, flexible, net, o 15 



Digitized by 



Office, Complete, of Holy Week, in Latin and English. 
34010, cloth, 0.50; cloth, gilt edges, fi 00 

Also in finer bindings. 

O'Grady, Eleanor. Aids to Correct and Effective Elocution, 
xamo, *i 25 

Select Recitations for Schools and Academies, iamo, *i 00 

Readings and Recitations for Juniors. x6mo, net, o 50 

Elocution Class. z6mo, net, o 50 

One Angel More in Heaven. With Letters of Condolence by 
St. Francis de Sales and others. White morocco, o 50 

On the Road to Rome, and How Two Brothers Got There. 
By William Richards. x6mo, o 50 

Our Birthday Bouquet. Culled from the Shrines of Saints 
and the Gardens of Poets. By E. C. DONNELLY. i6mo, 1 00 

Our Boys 1 and Girls' Library. 48mo, fancy boards. 

My Strange Friend. By Francis J. Finn, S.J. o 25 

The Dumb Child. By Canon Schmid. o 25 

The Boys in the Block. By Maurice F. Eoan. o 25 

The Hop Blossoms. By Canon Schmid. o 25 

The Fatal Diamonds. By E. C. Donnelly. o 25 

Buzzer's Christmas. By Mary T. Waggaman. 025 

Godfrey the Hermit. By Canon Schmid. o 25 

The Three Little Kings. By Emmy Giehrl. o 25 

The Black Lady. By Canon Schmid. o 25 

Master Fridolin. By Emmy Giehrl. o 25 

The Cake and the Easter Eggs. By Canon Schmid. o 25 

The Lamp of the Sanctuary. Wiseman. o 25 

The Rose Bush. By Canon Schmid. o 25 

The Overseer of Mahlbourg. By Canon Schmid. o 25 

Our Favorite Devotions. By Very Rev. Dean A. A. Lings. 

241110, to 60 

Our Favorite Novenas. By the Very Rev. Dean A. A. 
Lings. 24010, to 60 

Our Lady of Good Counsel in Genazzano. By Anne R. 
Bennett, nee Gladstone. 32010, o 75 

Our Monthly Devotions. By Very Rev. Dean A. A. Lings. 
i6mo, cloth, ti 25 

Our Own Will, and How to Detect It in Our Actions. By 
Rev. John Allen, D.D. i6mo, net, o 75 

Our Young Folks 1 Library. 10 volumes. i2mo. Each, o 45 

Outlaw of Camargue, The. A novel. By A. de Lamothe. 
i2mo, 1 as 

Outlines of Dogmatic Theology. By Rev. Sylvester J. 
Hunter, S.J. 3 vols., iamo, net, 4 50 

Outlines of Jewish History, from Abraham to Our Lord. 
By Rev. F.B. GlGOT, S.S. 8vo, | net, 1 50 

Outlines of New Testament History. By Rev. F. E. Gigot, 
S.S* 8vo, net, x 50 

Paradise on Earth Opened to All; or, A Religious Vocation 
the Surest Way in Life. 32mo, o 40 

ZO 



)y: Googk- - 



Pastime Series of Juveniles. x6mo, cloth. 

The Armorer of Solingen. o 45 

The Canary Bird. o 45 

Wrongfully Accused. o 45 

The Inundation. o 45 

Passing Shadows. A novel. By Anthony Yorke. wmo, 1 25 
Passion Flowers. Poems by Father Edmund Hill, CP. 
xamo, cloth, x 25 

Pearls from Faber. Selected and arranged by Marion J. 
Brunowe. 3amo, o 50 

People's Mission Book. 32010, paper, *o.io ; per xoo, 5 00 

Pere Monnier's Ward. A novel. By Walter Lecky. 

I2fflO, X 25 

Petronilla, and Other Stories. By E. C. Donnelly, wmo, 1 00 

Philosophy, English Manuals of Catholic. 

Logic. By Richard F. Clarke, S.J. i2mo, net, 1 25 

First Principles of Knowledge. By John Rickaby, S.J. 

xamo, net, 1 25 

Moral Philosophy (Ethics and Natural Law). By Joseph 
Rickaby, S. j. wmo, net, 1 25 

Natural Theology . By Bernard BoeddER, S.J. xamo, net, 1 50 
Psychology. By Michael Maher, S.J. i2mo, net, 1 50 
General Metaphysics. By John Rickaby, S.J. i2mo, net, 1 25 
Manual of Political Economy. ByC. S.DEVAS. i2mo, net, 1 50 

Pictorial Game of American Catholic Authors. 

Series A, net, o 35 

Series B, net, o 35 

Pictorial Lives of the Saints. With Reflections for Every 
Day in the Year. 50th Thousand. 8vo, 1 00 

10 copies, 7.50; 25 copies, 17.50 ; 50 copies, 33 50 

Pious Preparation for First Holy Communion. By Rev. 
F. X. Lasance. Large 32mo, to 75 

Popular Instructions on Marriage. By Very Rev. F. 
Girardey, C.SS.R. 32mo. Paper, *o.25 ; per 100, 12 50 

Cloth, *o.35 ; per 100, 21 00 

Popular Instructions on Prayer. By Very Rev. F. 
Girardey, C.SS.R. 32010. Paper, *o.25 ; per 100, 12.50. Cloth, 
♦0.35 ; per xoo, 21 00 

Popular Instructions to Parents on the Bringing Up of 
Children. By Very Rev. F. Girardey, C.SS.R. 32010. 
Paper, *o.25 ; per 100, 12 50 

Cloth, *o.35 ; per xoo, ax 00 

Practical Guide to Indulgences, A. Rev. P. M. Bernad, 
O.M.I. (Rev. Dan'l Murray.) 24010, o 75 

Prayer. The Great Means of Obtaining Salvation. Liguori. 
32010, o 50 

Prayer-Book for Lent. Meditations and Prayers for Lent. 
32mo, cloth, to 50 

Praxis Synodalis. Manuale Synodi Diocesanae ac Provincialis 
Celebrandce. wmo, net, o 60 

Priest in the Pulpit, The. A Manual of Homiletics and 
Catechetics. Schuech-Luebbermann. 8vo t net, x 50 

II 



Digitized by 



Reading and the Mind, with Something to Read. O'Conor, 
S.J. ianio, I net, o 50,. 

Reasonableness of Catholic Ceremonies and Practices. 
By Rev. J. J. Burke. i2mo, flexible cloth, *o.35 ; per 100; 21 00 

Registrum Baptismorum. 3200 registers. nzi6 Inches, net, 3 50 

Registrum Matrimoniorum. 3200 registers, zz x z6 inches. 

net, 3 50 

Religious State, The. With a Short Treatise on Vocation 
to the Priesthood. By St Alphonsus Liguori. 32010, o 50 

Reminiscences op Rt. Rev. Edgar P. Wadhams, D.D. 6y 
Rev. C. A. Walworth, zamo, illustrated, I net, z 00 

Rights of Our Little Ones. By Rev. James Conway, S J. 
32mo. Paper, ♦o.xs ; per 100, 9.00. Cloth, "0.25 ; per zoo, 15 00 

Romance of a Playwright. A novel. By H. de Bornier. 

i2ino, x 00 

Rosary, the Most Holy, in Thirty-one Meditations, Prayers, 

and Examples. By Rev. Eugene Grimm, C.SS.R. 32010, o 50 

Round Table, The, of the Representative French Catholic 
Novelists, containing the best stories by the best writers. 
With half-tone portraits, printed in colors, biographies, etc. 
x2mo, cloth, z 50 

Round Table, A, of the Representative American Catholic 
Novelists, containing the best stories by the best writers. 
With half-tone portraits, printed in colors, biographical 
sketches, etc. lamo, " x 50 

Round Table, A. of the Representative Irish and English 
Catholic Novelists, containing the best stories by the Dest 
writers. With half-tone portraits, printed in colors, bio- 
graphical sketches, etc. 12010, z 50 

Russo, N., S.J. De Philosophia Moral! Praelectiones in Collegio 
Georgiopolitano Soc. Jes. Anno 1889-1890. Habitae, a Patre 
Nicolao Russo. Editio altera. 8vo, half leather, net, 2 00 

Sacramentals of the Holy Catholic Church, The. By 
Rev. A. A. Lambing, LL.D. Illustrated edition. 24010. 
Paper, 0.25 ; 25 copies, 4.25 ; 50 copies, 7.50 ; xoo copies, 12 50 
Cloth, 0.50 ; 25 copies, 8.50 ; 50 copies, 15.00 ; xoo copies, 25 00 

Sacrament of Penance, The. Lenten Sermons. Paper, 

8 net, o 25 

Sacristan's Guide. A Hand-book for Altar Societies and those 

having charge of the Altar. x6mo, cloth, net, o 75 

Sacristy Ritual. Rituale Compendiosum, sen Ordo Admi- 

oistraodi qusedam Sacramenta et alia officia Ecclesiastica 

Rite peragendi ex Rituale Romano novissime edito desnmptas. 

x6mo, flexible, net, o 75 

Sacred Rhetoric, nmo, net, o 75 

Sacrifice of the Mass Worthily Celebrated, The. By 

the Rev. Father Chaignon, S.J. Traoslated by Rt. Rev. L. 

de Goesbriand, D.D. 8vo, net, 1 50 

St. Anthony, the Saint of the Whole World. Illustrated by Pen 

and Pencil. Compiled from the best sources by Rev. THOS. 

F.WARD. Illustrated. Square iamo, cloth, 075 

12 



Digitized by 



Sacred Heart, Books on The. 

Child's Prayer-Book of the Sacred Heart. 321110, o as 

«. Devotions to the Sacred Heart for the First Friday. 321110, o 4? 

Imitation of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. By Rev. F. 
▲rnoudt. S.J. From the Latin by Rev. J. M. Fastre, S. J. 
i6mo, cloth, ti 25 

Little Prayer-Book of the Sacred Heart. Small 32mo, to 4© 

Month of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Huouet. 32mo, o 50 

Month of the Sacred Heart for the Young Christian. By 
Brother Philippe. 32mo, o 50 

New Month of the Sacred Heart. St. Francis de Sales. 
32mo, o 25 

One and Thirty Days with Blessed Margaret Mary. 32mo, 
♦0.25 : per 100, 15 00 

Pearls from the Casket of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 32010, o 50 

Revelations of the Sacred Heart to Blessed Margaret Mary ; 
and the History of Her Life. Bougaud. 8vo, net, 1 50 

Sacred Heart Studied in the Sacred Scriptures. By Rev. H. 
Saintrain. C.SS.R. 8vo, net, 2 00 

Six Sermons on Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 
BlERBAUM. x6mo, net, o 60 

Year of the Sacred Heart. Drawn from the works of Pere 
de la Colombiere, of Margaret Mary, and of others. 
32mo, o 50 

St. Chantal and the Foundation of the Visitation. By 

Monseigneur Bougaud. 2 vols., 8vo, net, 4 00 

St. Joseph Our Advocate. From the French of Rev. Father 

Huguet. 24010, o 75 

Schmid, Canon. Canary Bird, The. x6mo, o 45 

Black Lady, The, and Robin Redbreast. 24010, o 25 

Rose Bush, The. 24010, o 25 

«. Overseer of Mahlbourg, The. 24010, o 25 

Hop Blossoms, The. 24010, o 25 

. Godfrey the Hermit. 24010, o 25 

Cake, The, and the Easter Eggs. 24010, o 25 

Secret of Sanctity, The. According to St. Francis de 

Sales and Father Crasset, S.J. 12010, net, 1 00 

Seraphic Guide. A Manual for the Members of the Third 

Order of St. Francis. Cloth, to 60 

Roan, red edges. +0 7s 

The same in German at the same prices. 
Sermons. See also " Hunolt," 11 Sacrament of Penance," " Seven 

Last Words," and "Two-Edged Sword." 
Sermons for the Children of Mary. From the Italian of 

Rev. F. Callerio. Revised by Rev. R. F. Clarke, SJ. 

8vo, cloth, net, x 50 

Sermons, Funeral. 2 vols., I net, 2 00 

Sermons, Lenten. Large 8vo, 8 ne t, 3 00 

Sermons, Old and New. 8 vols., 8vo, | net, 16 00 

Sermons on Our Lord, the Blessed Virgin, and the 

Saints. By Rev. F. Hunolt, S.J. Translated by Rev. J. 

Allen, D.D. 3 vols., 8vo, net, 5 00 

Sermons on Penance. By Rev. F, Hunolt, S.J. Translated 

by Rev. J. Allen, D.D. 2 vols., 8vo, net, 5 00 

Sermons on the Blessed Virgin. By Very Rev. D. I. 

McDermott. z6mo, net, o 75 

13 



Digitized by 



Sermons on the Christian Virtues. By Rev. F. Hunolt, 
S.J. Translated by Re v.-J. Allen, D.D. svols.,8vo, net, 5 00 
Sermons on the Different States of Life. By Rev. P. 
Hunolt, S.J. Translated by Rev. J. Allen, D.D. a vols., 
8vo, net, 5 00 

Sermons on the Four Last Things. By Rev. F. Hunolt, 
S.J. Translated by Rev. J. Allen, D.D. a vols., 8vo, net, 5 00 
Sermons on the Seven Deadly Sins. By Rev. F. Hunolt, 
S.J. Translated by Rev. J. ALLEN, D.D. avols.,8vo, net, 500 
Sermons, abridged,.for all the Sundays and Holydays. By St. 

Alphonsus Liguori. nmo, net, 1 35 

SERMONS for the Sundays and Chief Festivals of the Ecclesiastical 
Year. With Two Courses of Lenten Sermons and a Triduum 
for the Forty Hours. By Rev. Julius Pottgeisser, S.J. 
From the German by Rev. James Conway, S.J. a vols., 
8vo, net, a 50 

Sermons on the Most Holy Rosary. By Rev. M. J. Frings. 

iamo, net, x 00 

Sermons, Short, for Low Masses. By Rev. F. X. Schouppe, 
S.J. xamo, net, 1 35 

Sermons, Six, on the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Bierbaum. 



Short Conferences on the Little Office of the Immacu- 
late Conception. By Very Rev. Joseph Rainer. With 
Prayers. 3amo, o 50 

Short Stories on. Christian Doctrine: A Collection of 
Examples Illustrating the Catechism. From the French by 
Mary McMahon. xamo, illustrated, net, o 75 

Smith, Rev. S. B., D.D. Elements of Ecclesiastical Law. 

Vol. I. Ecclesiastical Persons. 8vo, net, a 50 

Vol. U. Ecclesiastical Trials. 8vo, net, a 50 

Vol. III. Ecclesiastical Punishments. 8vo, net, a 50 

Compendium Juris Canonici, ad Usum Cleri et Semina- 

riorum nujus regionis accommodatum. 8vo, net, a 00 

The Marriage Process in the United States. 8vo, net, a 50 

Sodalists* Vade Mecum. A Manual, Prayer-Book, and 
Hymnal. 3amo, cloth, %o 50 

Songs and Sonnets, and Other Poems. By Maurice F. Egan. 

xamo, cloth, x 00 

Souvenir of the Novitiate. From the French by Rev. 

Edward I. Taylor. 3amo, net, o 60 

Spiritual Crumbs for Hungry Little Souls. To which are 
added Stories from the Bible. Richardson. x6mo, o 50 
Spiritual Exercises for a Ten Days' Retreat. By Very Rev. 

R. v. Smetana, C.SS.R., net, x 00 

Stang, Rev. William, D.D. Pastoral Theology. New enlarged 
edition. 8vo, net, x 50 

Eve of the Reformation, xamo, paper, | net, o 35 

Historiographia Ecclesiastica quam Historiae seriam Soli- 

damque Operam Navantibus, Accommodavit Guil. Stang, 
D.D. xamo, B net, 1 00 

^ Business Guide for Priests. 8vo, cloth, net, o 85 

Stories for First Communicants, for the time before and 
after First Communion. By Rev. J. A. Keller, D.D. 
3amo, o 50 



i6mo, 



net, o 60 




y Google 



dbyGOQgl 



u.y.uzeu ^w^iv 



